Published by Oxford University Press in association with The London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine
ß The Author 2008; all rights reserved. Advance Access publication 12 November 2008

Health Policy and Planning 2009;24:63–71
doi:10.1093/heapol/czn037

Thirty years of national health insurance in
South Korea: lessons for achieving universal
health care coverage
Soonman Kwon*

Accepted

21 June 2008

Keywords

Health care financing, health insurance, universal coverage, Korea

KEY MESSAGES


A mix of social insurance and tax can work well for health care financing systems in low- and middle-income countries.



Political commitment and family-based membership contribute to rapid population coverage moving toward universal
health care coverage.



Effective health care purchasing and the regulation of health care providers are key factors in the sustainability of health
care financing.

Introduction

universal coverage of its population. National health insurance
in Korea used to have multiple insurance societies covering
employees and the self-employed separately, although claim
review and payment to health care providers were centralized,
and statutory benefit packages were identical across schemes.
In 2000, there was a major change in the structure of the
health insurance programme, and all insurance societies were
merged into one single payer.
The Korean experience of the rapid development of social
health insurance can provide valuable lessons for countries

South Korea introduced mandatory social health insurance for
industrial workers in large corporations in 1977, and extended
it incrementally to the self-employed until it covered the entire
population in 1989. Therefore, from the introduction of social
health insurance, it took only 12 years for Korea to achieve
* Professor, Department of Health Policy and Management, School of
Public Health, Seoul National University, 28 Yonkon-dong, Chongno-gu,
Seoul 110–799, South Korea. Tel: þ82-2–740–8875. Fax: þ82-2–745–9104.
E-mail: kwons@snu.ac.kr

63

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

South Korea introduced mandatory social health insurance for industrial
workers in large corporations in 1977, and extended it incrementally to the
self-employed until it covered the entire population in 1989. Thirty years of
national health insurance in Korea can provide valuable lessons on key issues in
health care financing policy which now face many low- and middle-income
countries aiming to achieve universal health care coverage, such as: tax versus
social health insurance; population and benefit coverage; single scheme versus
multiple schemes; purchasing and provider payment method; and the role of
politics and political commitment. National health insurance in Korea has been
successful in mobilizing resources for health care, rapidly extending population
coverage, effectively pooling public and private resources to purchase health care
for the entire population, and containing health care expenditure. However,
there are also challenges posed by the dominance of private providers paid by
fee-for-service, the rapid aging of the population, and the public-private mix
related to private health insurance.

HEALTH POLICY AND PLANNING

Evolution of national health insurance
Introduction and extension of national health
insurance
The Health Insurance Law was enacted in December 1963
by the military government immediately after its coup d’e´tat.
Due to the country’s weak economic and social infrastructure,
the law eliminated mandatory insurance coverage, and social
insurance for health care was not actually implemented until
the mid-1970s. The Health Insurance Law was revised substantially in December 1976 in order to include the mandatory
enrolment of the population in health insurance (Kwon 2005).
Employees of corporations with more than 500 workers were
the first group to be covered by health insurance in 1977.
Health insurance was extended to workers in firms with more
than 300 employees in 1979, was further extended to firms
with more than 100 employees in 1981, and to those with more
than 16 employees in 1983. A Medical Aid programme
(Medicaid) started for the poor in 1977, and government
employees and teachers joined the health insurance programme
in 1979. To extend health insurance to the self-employed, the
government implemented a pilot programme in three rural
areas in 1981, and in one urban area and two additional rural
areas in 1982. The health insurance programme achieved
universal coverage of the population by including the rural
self-employed in January 1988 and the urban self-employed
in 1989 (Figure 1). From the beginning, the health insurance

50,000
45,000
40,000
35,000
30,000
25,000
20,000
15,000
10,000
5,000
0

97.6%

97.6%

98.5%

98.2%

2005

2006

93.7%

44.1%
24.2%
8.8%

1977

1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

Year
Population coverage

Employee

Regional

Figure 1 Population coverage of health insurance
Note: All insurance societies were merged into one in 2000.

system adopted family-based membership, with dependents
becoming members of the scheme that their household head
was enrolled in. Health insurance for employees was based on
workplaces, and that for the self-employed on their region of
residence. For the employee health insurance scheme, large
corporations had individual firm-level insurance societies, while
small and medium-sized firms were pooled to join an insurance
society in their geographic area.

Political and economic contexts
Introduction of health insurance
The authoritarian political regime and its motivation for
political legitimization played a key role in the introduction
and extension of social health insurance for health care in
Korea (Kwon 1999). Contrary to western welfare states, labour
movements or class struggles played no role in the development
of health insurance in Korea; there was no labour party or
social democratic political party, and labour unions became
active only in the late 1980s. Commencing in the early 1960s,
a series of 5-year Economic Development Plans, formulated by
President Park Chunghee, substantially improved the country’s
economic well-being through export-driven economic policy.
The Government began to recognize the importance of a welfare system, and the Fourth Economic Development Plan of
1977–1981 placed emphasis on social development, aiming to
distribute the fruits of economic development to workers.
Extension of health insurance to the self-employed
The extension of health insurance to the self-employed or
workers in the informal sector is a major challenge in the
universal coverage of a population. Both economic and political
factors contributed to the rapid extension of health insurance to
the self-employed, the last group to join the national health
insurance (NHI) in 1989 (Kwon 2005). Firstly, the booming
economy of the late 1980s substantially improved the ability of
the self-employed to pay for social insurance. The economy of
Korea enjoyed record high annual growth rates of about 12%
between 1986 and 1988. Thus the government had the fiscal
capacity to provide a subsidy for health insurance for the selfemployed. Secondly, as a political factor, President Chun
Doowhan and the presidential candidate of the ruling party,
Roh Taewoo, were former military generals and wanted to
obtain political support and legitimacy by proposing universal
health insurance coverage. The impending 1987 presidential

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

(mainly low- and middle-income) which aim to achieve health
care coverage for their entire population. There are many key
issues in health care financing, and different countries may
adopt different approaches. For example, the mode of health
care financing matters, such as tax versus social health
insurance, and each mode of financing has its own strengths
and weaknesses. Just how to extend population coverage and
how to design benefit coverage are important considerations;
there can be a trade off between these two coverage decisions.
Having a single health insurance scheme or multiple schemes
can have different effects on the efficiency and equity of health
care financing. The purchasing function of a health care
financing system, together with the provider payment method
and the regulation of health care providers, have critical effects
on the quality of care and financial sustainability. Finally,
health care financing policy depends on politics, and political
commitment and strategy affect the entire process of health
financing policy and reform. These challenges are not unique to
Korea, and as such, the paper contributes to the international
debate on health financing (Palmer et al. 2004; Carrin and
James 2005; WHO 2005; Gottret and Schieber 2006).
This paper aims to provide a discussion on the key issues
involved in achieving universal health care coverage, based on
the experience of Korea. The paper will first review the
historical development of health insurance in Korea, its major
characteristics, performance and recent reforms. Then it
examines key lessons from the Korean experience of health
insurance for countries aiming to provide health care coverage
for their entire population. The paper concludes by presenting
some of the future challenges the Korean health insurance
system will face.

Unit: Thousand persons

64

LESSONS FROM KOREA ON UNIVERSAL COVERAGE

National health insurance in Korea
Organizational structure
Before the merger of all health insurance societies in 2000,
there were three types of social health insurance schemes for:
(1) government employees and teachers and their dependents,
administered by a single insurance society; (2) industrial
workers and their dependents, with about 140 insurance
societies; and (3) the self-employed and workers in firms
with less than five employees, with about 230 insurance
societies (see Figure 1). There was, and remains, a separate
programme for the poor, Medicaid, covering the remaining
3–5% of the population, with an annual assessment of poverty
status. The Medicaid programme is financed by the general
revenue of the central and local governments, but administered
(e.g. payment to providers) through the health insurance
system (Shin 2006). There was no difference in the statutory
benefit coverage between social insurance societies. Before the
merger in 2000, each insurance scheme consisted of quasipublic insurance societies, which were subject to strict regulation by the Ministry of Health and Welfare. Beneficiaries were
assigned to insurance societies based on employment
(employees) and residential area (self-employed). There was
no competition among health insurance societies to attract the
insured and no selective contracting with health care providers.

Contributions and benefits
For industrial workers and government and school employees,
contribution is proportional to wage income and shared equally
between the employee and employer. Before the merger of
insurance societies in 2000, the average contribution rate was
5.6% (of wage income) for government and school employees,
and 3.75% for industrial workers, with a range of 3.0–4.2%
depending on the insurance society (subject to approval by
the Ministry of Health and Welfare). As of 2006, the contribution rate was 4.48% (NHIC 2007). There is a wages ceiling
for contribution assessment, but it is very high (monthly wage
of 50 000 USD) and only a small number of people are in
this category. Because reliable information about the incomes
of the self-employed is only partially available, the contribution formula for the self-employed is based on both income and
property.

Table 1 Economic and health indicators in Korea
1977

1989

2005

1042

5430

16 306

b

Life expectancy

64.8

71

77.4 (2003)

Mortality (per 100 000 persons)c

690

542.3

504.3

Infant mortality (per 1000 births)b,c

38 (average for 1970–75)

12

3.8 (average for 2000–05)

No. of physicians per 10 000 personsb

5 (1981)

8

16 (2004)
73

GDP per capita (in US$)a

No. of beds per 10 000 persons

b

17 (1981)

30

No. of physician visits per capitab

3.7

6.2

10.6 (2002)

No. of admissions per capitac

–

0.06 (1990)

0.12

No. of hospital days per admissionb

12

14

13.5 (2003)

Note: 1977 ¼ introduction of health insurance; 1989 ¼ universal coverage.
Source: aBank of Korea, 2006;
b
OECD Health Data, 2006;
c
National Statistical Office, 2006.

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

election prompted the ruling party to announce an expansion of
social welfare programmes as a major item on their campaign
agenda. In 1986, the government announced plans to include
the self-employed in the NHI, to introduce a national pension
scheme, and to implement a minimum wage system.
The government was also prompted to provide health insurance to the self-employed because of the increasing inequity between the amounts paid for medical care by the
(insured) employed and the (uninsured) self-employed. The
social health insurance system reimbursed providers based
on a regulated fee schedule, which induced health care
providers to charge higher (unregulated and market) fees to
the uninsured. The difference between the fees paid by the
insured (employees) and the unregulated price paid by the
uninsured (self-employed) increased over time. This costshifting from the employed sector to the worse-off selfemployed sector caused concerns around the lack of equity in
payments for health care.
The government wanted employees and the self-employed
to be covered by separate insurance societies to avoid problems associated with different degrees of income assessment
between the two groups. Contrary to the rather smooth extension of health insurance to industrial workers, its extension
to the self-employed faced tough resistance. Farmers requested
an increase in government subsidy to their health insurance scheme and an expansion of health care facilities in
rural areas for better access to medical care. Consequently,
the government subsidized the health insurance contribution of the self-employed and provided financial support
for hospitals to open in rural areas. The amount of tax subsidy to the self-employed was initially about the half of the
total revenue of the health insurance scheme for the selfemployed.
Table 1 presents some economic and health indicators
for 1977 (when health insurance was first introduced), 1989
(when universal coverage was achieved) and 2005. Korea
has experienced big improvements in economic conditions
and health outcomes such as life expectancy and mortality
during this period. The supply of health care personnel and
facilities and health care utilization have increased substantially, along with both economic development and health
insurance.

65

66

HEALTH POLICY AND PLANNING

Health care delivery and payment to providers
Health care delivery in Korea relies heavily on the private
sector; only about 10% of hospitals are public. There is no
difference for the health insurer in its dealings—for example,
in fee schedules—with private or public hospitals. Most office
(or clinic) based physicians are board-certified specialists, and
those in the area of surgery even have small inpatient facilities.
There is no formal gate-keeping, and clinics and hospitals
perform similar functions, resulting in a limited role of primary
care, and competition rather than coordination among physician clinics and hospitals.
Health care providers in Korea have been reimbursed by the
regulated fee-for-service system since the beginning of the
national health insurance. The fee-for-service system has led
to an increase in volume and intensity of services, the provision
of services with a greater margin, and distortion in the supply
of medical specialties in the long run. As a first step in the
transition from fee-for-service reimbursement to a prospective

payment system for inpatient care based on diagnosis-related
group (DRG), the government launched a DRG pilot programme in February 1997 for voluntarily participating health
care institutions. This pilot programme had a positive impact on
the behaviour of health providers, such as reductions in the
length of stay, medical expenses, the average number of tests
and the use of antibiotics, without a negative effect on quality
of care (Kwon 2003a), but strong opposition by providers has
been a stumbling block to the extension of the DRG payment
system to all health care providers.1
Regulation of provider behaviour also affects the financial
burden on patients. As fees are regulated for covered services,
providers have financial incentives to provide more non-covered
services, mainly new technology, for which they can charge the
market price. In a recent survey (Chung and Kim 2005), the
average OOP payment as a percentage of total medical expenses
for inpatient care was found to be 41% for hospitals (18% for
co-payment for covered services and 23% for non-covered
services) and 28% for physician clinics (18% and 10%,
respectively). For outpatient care, the average OOP payment
was 50% for hospitals (27% for co-payment for covered services
and 23% for non-covered services) and 34% for physician clinics
(26% and 8%, respectively). Therefore, in order to decrease the
financial burden of OOP payments, the government needs to
regulate provider behaviour and the adoption and use of new
health care technology.

Health expenditure
In 2004, Korea spent 5.6% of its GDP on health care, an
increase from 4.1% in 1985 (OECD 2006). This level of
expenditure is rather low compared with other OECD countries
(the OECD average is 8.9%), to some extent due to Korea’s
success in the containment of health care costs. However, real
health expenditure per capita has increased rapidly following
the introduction of universal coverage in the late 1980s, to a
level twice the average of OECD countries. At the same time,
low health expenditure as a percentage of GDP is partly due to
Korea’s rapid GDP growth. Since the growth of GDP in the
future will not be as high as in the past, the proportion of GDP

70.0

OOP% in total health care expenditure
(%)

60.0

KOREA
OECD average

50.0

40.0

30.0

20.0

10.0

0.0
KOREA

83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 00 01 02 03 04 Year
62.5 60.0 59.3 62.2 62.4 60.5 61.5 57.5 60.1 59.8 57.7 56.0 54.9 52.9 49.6 45.6 44.4 43.6 38.3 39.7 38.4 38.1

OECD average 20.8 19.6 19.9 20.9 20.4 19.7 19.6 18.9 19.6 20.0 20.5 20.4 20.4 20.4 19.9 19.8 19.9 20.0 19.5 19.2 19.0 19.2

Figure 2 Share of out-of-pocket payment in total health expenditure
Source: OECD Health Data, 2007.

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

The benefit package of health insurance mainly includes
curative services, but includes biannual health check ups
and vaccination is provided free of charge in public health
centres. For services covered by the NHI, the co-insurance rate
is uniformly 20% for inpatient care. The co-insurance rate is
35–50% for outpatient care in hospitals depending on the type
of hospital concerned. In outpatient care, the co-payment is set
higher for hospitals than for physician clinics in order to
encourage people to visit physician clinics before visiting
hospital outpatient centres. Beneficiaries of the Medicaid
programme, people over 65 years and those who need longterm treatment due to chronic or catastrophic conditions (such
as chronic renal failure, haemophilia, leukaemia, and cancer in
those under 18 years) pay discounted co-payments for outpatient care. One of the major contributions of health insurance
is to reduce out-of-pocket (OOP) payments. The share of OOP
payments in total health expenditure has decreased from 63%
in 1983 to 38% in 2004 (Figure 2). However, the share of OOP
payments in Korea is still greater than the OECD average
although the gap has decreased.

LESSONS FROM KOREA ON UNIVERSAL COVERAGE

Health care financing reform: single payer system
In 2000, all health insurance societies were merged into a single
national health insurer, the National Health Insurance
Corporation (NHIC). Inequity in health care financing and the
financial distress of many health insurance societies for the
self-employed were major driving forces behind the reform
(Kwon 2003c). Before the merger, for members of insurance
societies for the self-employed in poor areas, the burden of the
contribution as a proportion of their income was greater than
for those in wealthy regions. Horizontal inequity, whereby
people with the same earnings paid different social insurance
contributions depending on which insurance society they were
(mandatorily) enrolled in, despite identical statutory benefits,
caused concerns about the unfair burden of health insurance
contributions. In addition, many of the health insurance
societies for the self-employed in rural areas experienced
financial distress due to expanding health expenditure and
reduced ability to pay of their members as a result of decreasing
population, poor health status, and the aging population.
Before the merger, many health insurance societies were too
small in terms of the number of enrolees to pool the financial
risks of their members efficiently. Many small insurance
societies were not able to utilize economies of scale in
management either, and the merger was expected to reduce
administrative costs. Before the merger, the proportion of
administrative costs in total expenses was lowest (4.8%) in the
health insurance scheme for government and school employees
(single insurance society) and highest (9.5%) in the health
insurance scheme for the self-employed (NHIC 2000). As of
2006, the administrative cost of the national health insurance is
4% of total expenses (NHIC 2007). In addition to improved
equity in contribution payments and reduced administrative
costs, the single payer system of health insurance is expected
to have greater bargaining power as a monopsonistic purchaser
relative to health care providers.

The breakdown of the former policy equilibrium with multiple
insurance funds was also driven by the change in politics,
and subsequently by the active players who tried to take
advantage of the opportunities given by the change in the
political arena (Kwon and Reich 2005). The political changes
and the new president opened a window of opportunity for
the reform and substantially empowered the supporters of the
reform. The new president, Kim Dae Joong, had a progressive
political ideology and a keen interest in social policy. Politicians
who had constituents in rural areas supported the merger of
insurance societies so as to maximize votes. Farmers, the urban
poor, progressive academics and civic groups are long-time
supporters of the integrated health care financing system.
Business, which pays half of the contribution for employees,
was a potentially powerful opponent because it was concerned
that a unified health insurance system would result in a bigger
burden for employers and industrial workers in paying the
contribution, due to the difficulty in assessing the income of
the self-employed. But business gave little attention to financing
reform because at the same time it faced tough challenges
from structural adjustment following the economic crisis of 1997
(Kwon 2001).

Key lessons for achieving universal
health care coverage
Tax-based financing versus health insurance
A tax-based system has the benefit of rapid extension to
the informal sector, such as the 30 Baht scheme of Thailand
(Tangcharoensathien et al. 2004). If tax-based financing is
based on income tax, it can be more progressive than social
health insurance, where the contribution may be proportional
to income or just at a flat rate. However, there are questions
around the inequity associated with subsidizing the non-poor
self-employed, in addition to the budgetary burden on the
government in the tax-based health care system.
For many countries, where free care through a public health
delivery system does not work because of the lack of resources,
a health insurance contribution designated solely to the health
care sector is an attractive source of resources for health care.
Health insurance can also have the benefit of being participatory, with a sense of ownership among enrolees, although
this type of advantage can diminish as the size of risk pool
increases. However, health insurance is associated with a nontrivial enrolment/enforcement cost of covering the informal
sector because of problems related to assessing income and
collecting contributions. Even mandatory enrolment can face
non-compliance depending on economic conditions. In Korea,
the government did not want to bear the direct (budgetary and
administrative) burden associated with tax-based health care
financing, and instead played the role of regulator rather than a
financer (or provider) of health care. The role of government in
the provision of health, education and welfare services is very
limited in Korea.
The health insurance contribution for the self-employed in
Korea takes into account both income and property. The
property-based part of the contribution depends on the property
and car that a household owns. The income part of the

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

that is spent on health care is expected to increase. Partly
because the benefit coverage is not very extensive, taxation
and social insurance related to health care (national health
insurance, Medicaid, workers’ compensation) accounted for
about 52% of total health care expenditure in 2004 (OECD 2006).
Fiscal sustainability and cost containment have been of
concern for the national health insurance system in Korea, as
in many public financing systems for health care in developed
countries. National health insurance as a whole has experienced a deficit since 1997, but an accumulated surplus delayed
a fiscal crisis until 2001. An aging population, little incentive
for physicians to provide cost-effective care under the feefor-service system, and increasing demand for health care have
contributed to health care cost inflation. However, the fiscal
instability of the national health insurance has provided an
opportunity to increase its premium contribution substantially,
which to some extent has contributed to the extension of
benefit coverage (Kwon 2007). The national health insurance
is now financially stable. As a result of the increase in contribution and benefits, the average real growth of health expenditure was 8.9% per year in 1999–2004, which was greater than
the average for OECD countries (5.2%) (OECD 2006).

67

68

HEALTH POLICY AND PLANNING

paying their contribution for their employees until 2000. A full
subsidy for the poor and partial subsidy for the self-employed
have also contributed to the extension of coverage.
National health insurance in Korea started with a low benefit
package and benefit coverage was extended incrementally. The
government put a higher priority on the extension of population coverage because extending benefit coverage (with a high
contribution) can be a barrier to the rapid extension of
population coverage. Korea introduced outpatient care coverage
from the beginning, which, compared with coverage for
inpatient or catastrophic expenses only, provided enrolees
with more opportunities to experience the benefits of health
insurance, and consequently helped to minimize drop outs.
While there are positive effects of providing limited benefits
to a large number of people, there have been negative
consequences as well. Although the percentage of the public
share (social health insurance and tax) of national health
expenditure has increased from 32% in 1989 to 53% in 2004
(Table 2), it is still much lower than that in other OECD
countries. High OOP payment leads to limited financial
protection, and this can still be a barrier to medical care
utilization, which results in inequity and differential medical
care utilization across different socio-economic groups (Lu et al.
2007). Lee et al. (2003) showed that when the poverty line
was set at one-third of average daily expenses (the relative
poverty line), 5.1% of the households were below the poverty
line before spending on health care. This increased to 5.2% after
medical care spending, which implies that medical expenditure
does not significantly impoverish households. When the poverty
line was set at the level of the minimum expenses of living (the
national poverty line), the proportion of households below the
poverty line increased from 10.8% to 12.5% after spending on
medical care, implying that household expenditure on health
care can impoverish households to some extent. Exemption
from OOP payments for disadvantaged groups seems to
contribute to mitigating the impoverishment effect of health
expenditure.
The government has perceived the high OOP payment as a
key problem and has recently increased the benefit package
together with reducing OOP payments for cancer patients and
decreasing the ceiling on (cumulative) OOP payments.
However, once health insurance is fully established, major
change becomes difficult due to path dependency. For example,
raising the premium contribution to allow more extensive
benefit coverage will face opposition from those groups who
will have to pay more, such as the wealthy. Changing the

Population coverage and benefit coverage
Mandatory enrolment is more efficient than voluntary enrolment in order to avoid problems of adverse selection. An
authoritarian political regime and rapid economic development
in Korea were together effective in enforcing mandatory
enrolment and compliance of employers to pay half of the
contribution for employees, with few notable problems associated with false reporting of wages and evasion of registration.
Family-based membership in Korea contributed to rapid
extension of population coverage, by making the employees’
health insurance scheme cover the dependents of employees.
To ease the financial burden on small businesses, employers of
firms with fewer than five employees were exempted from
Table 2 Trends in national health expenditure in Korea (percentages)
1989

1991

1993

1995

1997

1999

2001

2003

Government

8.6

8.4

7.9

7.3

8.5

10.7

10.5

10.6

10.9

Social insurance

23.0

25.9

26.2

28.4

32.9

36.2

42.5

41.3

41.6

Public total

31.6

34.4

34.1

35.7

41.4

46.9

53

51.9

52.6

61.5

60.1

57.7

54.9

49.6

44.4

38.3

38.4

38.1

–

–

1.8

2.1

2.5

3.0

3.3

3.6

3.4

6.9

5.5

6.4

7.3

6.4

5.7

5.4

6.1

5.9

68.4

65.6

65.9

64.3

58.6

53.1

47.0

48.1

47.4

Household
Private insurance
Others
Private total

Source: OECD Health Data, 2007.

2004

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

contribution is based either on taxed income (for those whose
annual income is over US$5000) or on estimated income
(for those whose annual income is below US$5000). The
calculation of estimated income takes into account the age and
sex of the insured, household property, and the car tax of
the household. Non-payment of the monthly contribution for
more than 3 months results in the denial of health insurance
benefits. The hard-working culture of new organizations
(localized health insurance societies for the self-employed
before the merger in 2000) to some extent contributed to the
active enforcement and collection of premium contributions
from local residents.
Tax-based financing and social health insurance have been
converging, and both income tax and income-related insurance
contributions suffer from the problem of mis-targeting and
cross-subsidy when income assessment of the self-employed is
difficult. In such circumstances, a mixed system of tax-based
financing and health insurance can be a solution. The health
insurance schemes in Korea, Japan and Taiwan provide a
partial subsidy to the self-employed, which contributes to a
smooth extension of health insurance (Cheng 2003; Chiang
2005; Ikegami 2005). If a social health insurance system
includes a not-insignificant tax subsidy, the difference between
tax and health insurance becomes smaller. In 1988, the
proportion of government subsidy in the total revenue of the
health insurance scheme for the self-employed was 44.1%,
which fell to 25.6% in 1999 just before the merger of insurance
societies (NHIC 2000). Now Korea has a single health insurance
scheme and, as of 2006, general tax subsidy accounts for 12.8%
of the total revenue of the unified health insurance system, and
subsidy from tobacco tax accounts for 4.3% of health insurance
revenue (NHIC 2007).

LESSONS FROM KOREA ON UNIVERSAL COVERAGE

benefit structure by increasing the co-payment for outpatient
care and reducing cost sharing for inpatient care will face
opposition from office-based physicians. Korea now plans to
adopt a cost-effectiveness framework to decide on benefit
coverage, including pharmaceuticals and medical technology.

Single scheme versus multiple schemes

account for a large share of the revenue of health care providers
through, for example, the increases in population coverage
and in benefit coverage by health insurance. Furthermore,
pooling of funds can contribute to more efficient purchasing.
For example, reducing the role of state budget allocation
to public providers, and instead channelling it to the health
insurer in the form of a premium contribution increases the
leverage that the health insurance scheme can use on health
care providers. The introduction of some form of financial and
managerial autonomy for public hospitals may need to follow
the above change in funding stream. Most public hospitals in
Korea have been corporatized since the introduction of health
insurance, and they depend largely on patient revenue for
financial resources.
The payment system is an essential element of the financial
incentives of health care providers and is a key factor affecting
provider behaviour. Fee regulation applied to all providers
(public and private) in Korea has contributed to overall cost
containment, as in Japan (Ikegami and Campbell 1999), and
consequently to a rapid extension of population coverage. From
the beginning, the health insurance programme in Korea has
used centralized claim review and payment to providers, owing
to the uniform fee schedule enforced by the Ministry of Health
and Welfare. In that sense, even before the merger of insurance
schemes in 2000, national health insurance of Korea has had
single (pooled) purchasing. In the initial stage of the development of health insurance, Korea had a relatively limited supply
of physicians and health care facilities, and the government
mandated all providers to participate in the health insurance
programme—no health care provider can deny health insurance
patients. Now, Korea has sufficient supply of health care
providers, and the health insurance programme needs to adopt
selective contracting with providers for effective purchasing
and quality control.
At the beginning of the health insurance programme, health
care providers in Korea accepted fee regulation because they
were able to charge market (unregulated) prices to the
uninsured. As population coverage was extended, the effect of
fee regulation became more restrictive on provider practices. By
the time that universal coverage was achieved, it was too late
for providers to resist fee regulation. Therefore, if a health
insurance programme wants to introduce payment regulation
to providers, it may find it easier to do at an early stage of
population coverage. Now, changing the payment system to one
of DRG payment or capitation is a major challenge for the
Korean health insurance system. There is also an interrelationship between payment system and benefit coverage. When a
health insurance scheme tightens the payment level or payment
method to providers, they tend to substitute non-covered
services (e.g. new health care technology), which are not
subject to fee regulation, for covered ones. Therefore, policies on
benefit coverage and payment system need to be coordinated,
and government needs to regulate the rapid adoption of new
medical technology.

Purchasing and regulation
Purchasing and payment to health care providers is critical for
the financial sustainability of, and quality of care provided by,
the health care financing system. For effective purchasing
where money follows the patient, the health insurer should

Governance
The governance of the health insurance agency affects
the accountability and efficiency of the health insurance
system. The National Health Insurance Corporation (NHIC),

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

Managing health insurance through a single fund or through
multiple funds will have different effects on the efficiency and
equity of health care financing. Korea started with multiple
schemes, but changed to a single scheme in 2000, 11 years after
achieving universal coverage of health care. In terms of the
efficiency of risk pooling or financial sustainability, a single
fund is preferred, although there may be a threshold above
which marginal efficiency gain becomes smaller. The monopolistic behaviour of a single fund can decrease the efficiency of
a health insurance system, but when there is no consumer
choice of funds even under the system of multiple funds, as in
many developing countries, the potential efficiency loss of a
single scheme may become insignificant. Some of the functions
of health insurance can be decentralized; the single payer of
Korean health insurance uses local branches for enrolment and
premium collection. Even before the merger of insurance
schemes, medical claims made by providers for reimbursement
were reviewed by a central review agency.
In many countries (e.g. China, Thailand), there are separate
schemes for public sector workers, private employees, and
the self-employed, and these schemes have different benefit
coverage, with formal sector workers enjoying more generous
benefits (Tangcharoensathien et al. 2004; Bloom 2005). Benefits
coordination across schemes has faced opposition by those who
are currently enjoying generous benefits. Differences in benefit
coverage across health insurance schemes results in social
stratification and problems of portability, especially when there
is a huge migration (from rural to urban areas). Thanks to
government-driven extension, statutory benefit coverage was
uniform across all insurance societies in Korea even before the
merger of insurance societies in 2000.2
When there are multiple health insurance schemes, risk
adjustment or risk equalization across schemes is necessary.
However, as the role of risk adjustment across schemes gets
bigger, multiple schemes become similar to a single scheme.
Korean health insurance system used risk adjustment based on
the proportion of the elderly and catastrophic expenditure of
each scheme, and health insurance societies for the selfemployed were the major beneficiaries of the risk adjustment
mechanism. In 1998, before the merger of insurance societies,
revenue from the risk equalization fund formed 10.9% of
the total revenue of the health insurance scheme for the selfemployed (NHIC 2000). But the financial distress of health
insurance societies in some rural areas continued, and the
government finally decided to merge all insurance schemes into
one in 2000.

69

70

HEALTH POLICY AND PLANNING

Politics
Economic development contributed to the rapid extension of
health insurance by improving the capacity to pay of employers,
employees and government in Korea. However, the critical
role of politics in the development of health insurance cannot
be over-emphasized. The authoritarian government pushed the
idea of health insurance for political legitimization, and mobilized capable technocrats at the Ministry of Health and Welfare.
In the introduction and extension of health insurance, the
authoritarian regime was able to implement major policy changes
based on a top-down process, with the oppression of some key
interest groups such as medical providers. However, recent
democratization in the policy process has empowered vested
interest groups, and government capacity to manage diversified
interests becomes key to major health policy changes. Mobilizing
civic groups can be effective in policy change by counteracting
the dominance of interest groups, as in the case of Korean
health care financing reform in 2000 (Kwon and Reich 2005).
Government capacity and political will have been
key factors in the development of health care financing
policy in the Philippines, Taiwan, and Thailand recently
(Tangcharoensathien et al. 2004; Wong 2004; Obermann et al.
2006). Political will and commitment are crucial for universal
coverage of the population in these countries. Without government subsidy to the poor and informal sector workers, universal coverage seems unfeasible in many low- and middle-income
countries. Good governance, transparency and accountability of
the health insurance programme, as well as payment system
design and regulation of health care providers, all need strong
support from the government.

Future challenges
National health insurance in Korea has been successful in
mobilizing resources for health care, rapidly extending

population coverage, effectively pooling resources to purchase
health care for the entire population, and containing health
care expenditure reasonably. Rapid economic development,
strong political commitment to health insurance, and capable
bureaucrats all contributed to the rapid extension of health
insurance and to universal coverage. The Korean health
insurance system also shows that a mixture of insurance
contribution and tax financing works well for health care
financing, that social health insurance can use an incomerelated contribution formula for the self-employed, and that
there is a positive benefit to having a single payer system
relative to a system of multiple funds. However, when the
majority of the population works in the informal sector, as in
many low income countries, a flat premium contribution may
be inevitable, at least in the early stages. The social health
insurer can try to incrementally segment the informal sector by
occupation types for the purpose of differentiating premiums.
There are also many challenges for national health insurance
in Korea. Public financing based on social health insurance
combined with effective purchasing of health care from private
providers in Korea can have the benefit of efficient service
provision and equitable payment for health care. However,
competition among private providers has often increased costs
without substantial improvement in quality of care. The
predominance of private providers in the health care delivery
system has been a challenge for government regulation and the
cost-containment goal of the health insurance programme.
Payment system reform will be a key factor for fiscal
sustainability of the programme in the long run. At the same
time, expansion of benefit coverage is necessary to further
improve the financial protection provided.
The rapid aging of the population is a major challenge, which
will affect national health insurance along with other social
insurance programmes in Korea. As of 2006, the proportion of
elderly (over 65) in the population is 8.6%, but they account for
25.9% of health insurance expenditure, increasing from 17.7%
in 2001 (NHIC 2007). To ease the burden of population aging
on health insurance, the government introduced a new social
insurance scheme for long-term care in 2008, separate from
health insurance (Kwon 2008). Public-private mix is another
concern in health care in Korea, including the role of private
health insurance. Faced with increasing health care demand
and expectation, social insurance for health often cannot afford
to cover all new services and technology. Some maintain that
private health insurance should be encouraged to ease the fiscal
burden of social health insurance and to improve its efficiency,
but others believe that the role of social health insurance
should be further extended with increases in contributions for
social solidarity.

Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the WHO
Interregional Conference on Health Care Financing held in
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolia, in August 2006, and at the GTZ/ILO/
World Bank Conference on Extension of Health Insurance to
the Informal Sector held in Manila, Philippines, in October
2006. Helpful comments by the conference participants are
gratefully acknowledged. The usual disclaimer applies.

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

a not-for-profit single purchaser in Korea, is not a government
agency but under strict supervision and regulation by a single
government agency, i.e. the Ministry of Health and Welfare.
Close coordination between the health insurance agency and
the Ministry of Health helps health insurance better serve the
goals of health policy. But if the Ministry of Health directly
administers the health insurance programme when health
care is provided mainly by public providers, an effective purchasing function can suffer because purchaser is not separated
from providers.
Similarly, established social security agencies, specializing in
pension and other programmes for formal sector workers, are
not likely to have the capacity to effectively purchase services
and manage health care providers. Furthermore, in many
countries (e.g. Mongolia and China), health care financing
functions are spread over ministries such as Ministry of
Health, Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Finance, etc, leading
to coordination failure among them (Bayarsaikhan et al. 2005).
A separate single organization dedicated to the health insurance programme, as in Korea, Japan and the Philippines, seems
more effective than multiple ministries or administrative agencies
in building skills and harmonizing health insurance policy.

LESSONS FROM KOREA ON UNIVERSAL COVERAGE

Endnotes
1

Health care providers gained an increased voice and bargaining power
in health policy making after several nationwide strikes against
health care reforms in 2000 (Kwon 2003b).
2
Health insurance in the Philippines also has a uniform benefit package
across different schemes (Obermann et al. 2006).

References

71

Kwon S. 2005. Health policy in. In Gauld R. (ed.) Comparative Health
Policy in the Asia-Pacific. Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open
University Press, pp. 48–68.
Kwon S. 2007. The fiscal crisis of National Health Insurance in the
Republic of Korea: in search of a new paradigm. Social Policy and
Administration 41: 1652–178.
Kwon S. 2008. Future of long-term care financing for the elderly in.
Journal of Aging and Social Policy 20: 119–136.
Kwon S, Reich M. 2005. The changing process and politics of
health policy in Korea. Journal of Health Politics, Policy and Law 30:
1003–26.
Lee T, Yang B, Kwon S et al. 2003. Equity in expenditure on
health care in Korea. Korean Health Economic Review 9: 25–33 (in
Korean).

Carrin G, James C. 2005. Social health insurance: key factors affecting
the transition towards universal coverage. International Social
Security Review 58: 45–64.

Lu J, Leung G, Kwon S et al. 2007. Horizontal equity in health care
utilization – evidence from three high-income Asian economies.
Social Science and Medicine 64: 199–212.

Cheng T-M. 2003. Taiwan’s new national health insurance program:
genesis and experience so far. Health Affairs 22: 61–76.

National Health Insurance Corporation (NHIC). 2000. Internal reports.
Seoul (in Korean).

Chiang T-L. 2005. Health policy in Taiwan. In Gauld R (ed.). Comparative
health policy in the Asia-Pacific. Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open
University Press, pp. 69–90.

National Health Insurance Corporation (NHIC). 2000. Health Insurance
Statistics. Seoul (in Korean).

Chung J, Kim J. 2005. Survey of out-of-pocket payment of patients.
Health Insurance Forum, Spring.
Gottret P, Schieber G. 2006. Health financing revisited. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Ikegami N. 2005. Health policy in Japan. In Gauld R (ed.). Comparative
health policy in the Asia-Pacific. Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open
University Press, pp. 122–45.
Ikegami N, Campbell L. 1999. Health care reform in Japan: the virtues
of muddling through. Health Affairs 18: 56–75.
Kwon H. 1999. The welfare state in Korea: the politics of legitimization. New
York: St Martins Press.
Kwon S. 2001. Economic crisis and social policy reform in. International
Journal of Social Welfare 10: 97–106.
Kwon S. 2003a. Payment system reform for health care providers in
Korea. Health Policy and Planning 18: 84–93.
Kwon S. 2003b. Pharmaceutical reform and physician strikes: separation
of drug prescribing and dispensing in Korea. Social Science and
Medicine 57: 529–38.
Kwon S. 2003c. Health care financing reform and the new single payer
system in Korea: social solidarity or efficiency? International Social
Security Review 56: 75–94.

National Health Insurance Corporation (NHIC). 2007. Health Insurance
Statistics. Seoul (in Korean).
Obermann K, Jowett M, Alcantaa M, Banzon E, Bodart C. 2006.
Social health insurance in a developing country: the case of the
Philippines. Social Science and Medicine 62: 3177–85.
OECD. 2006. OECD health data 2006. Paris: OECD.
Palmer N, Mueller M, Gilson L, Mills A, Haines A. 2004. Health
financing to promote access in low income settings—how much do
we know? The Lancet 364: 1365–70.
Shin Y. 2006. Policy context of the poor progress of the pro-poor
policy: a case study on the medical-aid policy during Kim
Dae-Joong’s government (1998–2000) in the Republic of Korea.
Health Policy 78: 209–23.
Tangcharoensathien V, Wibulpholprasert S, Nitayaramphong S. 2004.
Knowledge-based changes to health systems: the Thai experience
in policy development. Bulletin of the World Health Organization 82:
750–6.
Wong J. 2004. Healthy democracies: welfare politics in Taiwan and South
Korea. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
WHO. 2005. Sustainable health financing, universal coverage and social health
insurance. WHA58.33, WHO resolution. Geneva: World Health
Organization.

Downloaded from http://heapol.oxfordjournals.org/ at Mount Allison University on July 13, 2015

Bayarsaikhan D, Kwon S, Ron A. 2005. Development of social health
insurance in Mongolia: successes, challenges and lessons.
International Social Security Review 58: 27–44.
Bloom G. 2005. Health policy in China. In Gauld R (ed.). Comparative
health policy in the Asia-Pacific. Buckingham & Philadelphia: Open
University Press, pp. 23–47.

