PERSPECTIVES

Allostasis and Allostatic Load: Implications
for Neuropsychopharmacology
Bruce S. McEwen, Ph.D.

The primary hormonal mediators of the stress response,
glucocorticoids and catecholamines, have both protective
and damaging effects on the body. In the short run, they are
essential for adaptation, maintenance of homeostasis, and
survival (allostasis). Yet, over longer time intervals, they
exact a cost (allostatic load) that can accelerate disease
processes. The concepts of allostasis and allostatic load
center around the brain as interpreter and responder to
environmental challenges and as a target of those
challenges. In anxiety disorders, depressive illness, hostile
and aggressive states, substance abuse, and post-traumatic
stress disorder (PTSD), allostatic load takes the form of
chemical imbalances as well as perturbations in the diurnal
rhythm, and, in some cases, atrophy of brain structures. In
addition, growing evidence indicates that depressive illness
and hostility are both associated with cardiovascular disease
(CVD) and other systemic disorders. A major risk factor for
these conditions is early childhood experiences of abuse and

neglect that increase allostatic load later in life and lead
individuals into social isolation, hostility, depression, and
conditions like extreme obesity and CVD. Animal models
support the notion of lifelong influences of early experience
on stress hormone reactivity. Whereas, depression and
childhood abuse and neglect tend to be more prevalent in
individuals at the lower end of the socioeconomic ladder,
cardiovascular and other diseases follow a gradient across
the full range of socioeconomic status (SES). An SES
gradient is also evident for measures of allostatic load.
Wide-ranging SES gradients have also been described for
substance abuse and affective and anxiety disorders as a
function of education. These aspects are discussed as
important, emerging public health issues where the brain
plays a key role. [Neuropsychopharmacology
22:108–124, 2000] © 1999 American College of
Neuropsychopharmacology. Published by Elsevier Science
Inc.

KEY WORDS: Homeostasis; Stress; Depression; PTSD;

and anxiety disorders are estimated to account for almost half of the cost burden of these disorders (Rupp et
al. 1998). Stress plays a role in mental disorders, as both a
causal factor and an outcome of disordered thought and
disrupted interpersonal relationships (for discussion of
major depression in this regard, see Kessler 1997).
In spite of the wide-spread recognition of these relationships, medical science has been struggling for decades to understand the relationship between stress
and disease. Stress may be defined as a threat, real or
implied, to the psychological or physiological integrity
of an individual. However, the widespread use of the
term “stress” in popular culture has made this word a
very ambiguous term to describe the ways in which the
body copes with psychosocial, environmental, and
physical challenges. One reason for this ambiguity is
that the subjective experience of stress does not always

Substance abuse; Cardiovascular disease; Hostility;
Anxiety; Development; Socioeconomic status
Diagnosable mental disorders affect approximately 22%
of the adult US population in any given year, and the
costs associated with treating these disorders was estimated almost a decade ago to be $74 billion, with an additional estimated indirect cost of the same magnitude
for lost productivity. Clearly, the total costs are much
greater now as we approach the year 2000! Affective

From the Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology, The Rockefeller
University, New York, NY.
Address correspondence to: Bruce S. McEwen, Ph.D., The Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue, New York, NY 10021.
Received June 27, 1999; revised September 28, 1999; accepted September 30, 1999.
NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2
© 1999 American College of Neuropsychopharmacology
Published by Elsevier Science Inc.
655 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10010

0893-133X/00/$–see front matter
PII S0893-133X(99)00129-3

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

predict the elevation of the physiological “stress mediators,” particularly cortisol and catecholamines (Kirschbaum et al. 1999). These physiological mediators are associated with both adaptation and pathophysiology, in
the sense that both cortisol and catecholamines are mediators of the adaptation of many systems of the body
to acute challenges, while, at the same time, these mediators also participate in pathological changes over long
periods of time ranging from immunosuppression to
obesity, hypertension, and atherosclerosis. Therefore,
the measurement of these mediators during the course
of both acute stress and chronic challenge constitutes
one means of connecting experience with resilience or the
risk for disease. This will be elaborated further below.
Another reason for the ambiguity of the term
“stress” is because the “stress mediators” also vary in
their basal secretion according to a diurnal rhythm that
is coordinated by the light-dark cycle and sleep-waking
patterns, and perturbations in this pattern are also linked
to pathophysiological outcomes. Therefore, the challenge
for investigators is to discriminate aspects of temporal
patterning and intensity that discriminate between the
protective and damaging actions of the stress mediators.
Since the description of Hans Selye of the “general
adaptation syndrome” in response to stressors (Selye
1936), there has been an inherent paradox, namely, that
the systems that react to stress—the autonomic nervous
system and the adrenocortical system—are important
protectors of the body in the short run but cause damage and accelerate disease when they are active over long
periods of time. What has been lacking is a comprehensive model that links these seemingly contradictory effects and provides at the same time insights into how individuals differ in their vulnerability to develop diseases.
This Perspective article describes such a model
(McEwen 1998; McEwen and Stellar 1993) and discusses
its applicability to psychiatric disorders, in which altered states of brain chemistry and function make the
afflicted individual more susceptible to the physiological impact of life events and, in turn, more vulnerable to
the impact of the stress hormones themselves. Furthermore, these considerations of stress and health are becoming useful in understanding gradients of health
across the full range of education and income, referred
to as “socioeconomic status” or SES (Adler et al. 1993).
SES is as powerful a determinant of mortality as smoking, exposure to carcinogens, and many genetic risk factors, as was discussed at a recent meeting of the New
York Academy of Sciences (Adler et al. in press).

PROTECTIVE AND DAMAGING EFFECTS OF
STRESS MEDIATORS
The most important aspect of the hormones associated
with stress is that they have protective effects in the

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 109

short run and yet can have damaging effects over
longer time intervals if there are many adverse life
events or if the hormonal secretion is disregulated
(McEwen 1998). Some examples will illustrate these differences, noting instances where the two primary stress
mediators, glucocorticoids and catecholamines, participate in protective and damaging outcomes. For example, glucocorticoids, so-named because of their ability
to promote conversion of protein and lipids to usable
carbohydrates, serve the body well in the short run by
replenishing energy reserves after a period of activity,
like running away from a predator. Glucocorticoids
also act on the brain to increase appetite for food and to
increase locomotor activity and food seeking behavior
(Leibowitz and Hoebel 1997), thus regulating behaviors
which control energy input and expenditure. This is
very useful when we have run two miles, but it is not
beneficial when we grab a bag of potato chips while
writing a grant or a paper. Inactivity and lack of energy
expenditure creates a situation where chronically-elevated glucocorticoids can impede the action of insulin
to promote glucose uptake. One of the results of this interaction is that insulin levels increase, and, together,
insulin and glucocorticoid elevation promote the deposition of body fat, and this combination of hormones
also promotes the formation of atherosclerotic plaques
in the coronary arteries (Brindley and Rolland 1989).
For the heart, we see a similar paradox. Getting out of
bed in the morning requires an increase in blood pressure and a reapportioning of blood flow to the head so
we can stand up and not faint (Sterling and Eyer 1988).
In addition, our blood pressure rises and falls during the
day as physical and emotional demands change, providing adequate blood flow as needed. Yet, repeatedly
elevated blood pressure promotes generation of atherosclerotic plaques, particularly when combined with a supply of cholesterol and lipids and oxygen free radicals
that damage the coronary artery walls (Manuck et al.
1995). Beta adrenergic receptor blockers are known to
inhibit this cascade of events and to slow down the atherosclerosis that is accelerated in dominant male cynomolgus monkeys exposed to an unstable dominance hierarchy (Manuck et al. 1991). Thus, catecholamines and
the combination of glucocorticoids and insulin can have
dangerous effects on the body, besides their important
short-term adaptive roles (Brindley and Rolland 1989).
In the brain, strong emotions frequently lead to
“flash-bulb” memories, e.g., where we were and what
we were doing when we heard of John Lennon’s assassination or Princess Diana’s fatal accident, or remembering the location and events associated with a very
positive life-event, like proposing marriage or receiving
a promotion or award. Both catecholamines acting via
beta adrenergic receptors and glucocorticoid hormones
acting via intracellular receptors play an important role
in establishing these long-lasting memories, and a num-

110 B.S. McEwen

ber of brain structures participate along with the autonomic nervous system. As will be discussed below, the
amygdala plays an important role in this type of memory, aided by the autonomic nervous system, which
picks up a signal from circulating adrenalin, and by the
hippocampus, which helps us remember “where we
were and what we were doing” at the time the
amygdala was turned on in such a powerful way. The
paradox for the brain comes when there is repeated
stress over many days or when glucocorticoid levels remain high because of adrenal overactivity or poor shut
off of the stress response. Then, there is atrophy of pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus and shut-down of
on-going neurogenesis in the dentate gyrus (McEwen
1999). After very prolonged and severe stress, pyramidal neurons may actually die (Uno et al. 1989). Through
some or all of these processes, the hippocampus undergoes an atrophy, and this can be picked up in the human brain by MRI in such conditions as recurrent depressive illness, Cushing’s syndrome, post-traumatic stress

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

disorder (PTSD), mild cognitive impairment in aging,
and schizophrenia (McEwen 1997; Sapolsky 1996).

ALLOSTASIS AND ALLOSTATIC LOAD
Thus, protection and damage are the opposite, and
seemingly unavoidable extremes, of the release of adrenal hormones during stress and in the diurnal rhythm.
What are the characteristics of the overactivity of the
stress hormone axis which leads to pathophysiology
and damage? Figure 1 presents a number of alternative
patterns of the hormonal stress response that illustrate
what is called “allostatic load” (McEwen 1998). Allostasis (literally “maintaining stability, or homeostasis,
through change”) refers to the process of adaptation to
acute stress, involving the output of stress hormones
which act in the ways described above to restore homeostasis in the fact of a challenge (Sterling and Eyer
1988). “Allostatic load” refers to the price the body pays

Figure 1. Four types of allostatic load are illustrated. The top panel illustrates the normal allostatic response, in which a
response is initiated by a stressor, sustained for an appropriate interval, and then turned off. The remaining panels illustrate
four conditions that lead to allostatic load: 1) Repeated “hits” from multiple novel stressors; 2) Lack of adaptation; 3) Prolonged response due to delayed shut down; and 4) inadequate response that leads to compensatory hyperactivity of other
mediators, e.g., inadequate secretion of glucocorticoid, resulting in increased levels of cytokines that are normally counterregulated by glucocorticoids). Figure drawn by Dr. Firdaus Dhabhar, Rockefeller University. Reprinted from McEwen 1998,
with permission.

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

for being forced to adapt to adverse psychosocial or
physical situations, and it represents either the presence
of too much stress or the inefficient operation of the
stress hormone response system, which must be turned
on and then turned off again after the stressful situation
is over (see top panel in Figure 1).
In Figure 1, the top left panel refers to chronic stress
(turning on the stress hormone response frequently by
novel events); and the negative consequences result
from the over-exposure to stress hormones resulting in
the various types of pathophysiology and wear and tear
described above. People who have had excessive stress
in their lives, as measured by multiple periods of poverty level income, show earlier aging, more depression,
and an earlier decline of both physical and mental functioning (Lynch et al. 1997b). Moreover, individuals who
have been abused as children suffer an increased risk
for depression, suicide, substance abuse, and earlier
mortality and morbidity from a wide range of diseases
(Felitti et al. 1998).
Yet, there are circumstances in which the number of
stressful events may not be excessive but in which the
body fails to manage the hormonal stress response, and
these are illustrated in the three remaining panels in
Figure 1. The top right panel illustrates a failure to habituate to repeated stressors of the same kind. Measurement of cortisol in a repeated public speaking challenge
has revealed individuals who do not habituate, and
these individuals, who lack self-confidence and selfesteem, are undoubtedly overexposing their bodies to
stress hormones under many circumstances in daily life
that do not overtly disturb other individuals (Kirschbaum et al. 1995).
The bottom left panel of Figure 1 refers to failure to
turn off each stress response efficiently. One example of
this is individuals with two parents who are hypertensive, and who show prolonged elevation of blood pressure after a physiological stressor (Gerin and Pickering
1995). Another example is the hypersecretion of cortisol
in the evening in people who have been sleep deprived
(Leproult et al. 1997; Spiegel et al. 1999), as well as in
depressed individuals. The reason that evening elevation of cortisol is bad is that it has a greater effect in
causing a delayed hyperglycemic state than does cortisol elevation in the morning (Plat et al. 1999). In depression, loss of bone mineral density has been reported
(Michelson et al. 1996).
The bottom right panel of Figure 1 describes a situation in which the hormonal stress response is inadequate to the needs of the individual genotype, resulting
in excessive activity of other allostatic systems such as
the inflammatory cytokines, which are normally contained by elevated levels of cortisol and catecholamines. The Lewis rat illustrates this condition, having
less corticosterone than the virtually syngeneic Fischer
rat. Lewis rats are vulnerable to inflammatory and au-

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 111

toimmune disturbances, which are not found in Fischer
rats (Sternberg 1997). Comparable human disorders involving lower-than-needed cortisol include fibromyalgia and chronic fatigue syndrome (Buske-Kirschbaum
et al. 1997; Crofford et al. 1994; Heim et al. 1998; Ur et al.
1992; Poteliakhoff 1981).
Thus, the distinction between protection and damage, as far as hormonal mediators of stress are concerned, is related to the dynamics of the hormonal
stress response. As noted above and discussed at the
end of this Perspective, differences in hormonal dynamics and “allostatic load” may well explain gradients of
morbidity and mortality that are seen across the full
range of income and education referred to as SES and
which account for striking differences of health between rich and poor.

MEASUREMENT OF ALLOSTATIC LOAD
How is allostatic load measured? Assessment of allostatic load would optimally incorporate information on
“resting” or “usual” levels of allostatic mediators for
each individual, as well as assessments of system dynamics (i.e., alterations in the “operating range” of the
system parameters in response to stimulation, so as to
tap into the four types of allostatic load depicted in Figure 1); and it would include information for parameters
of all major physiological regulatory systems. In the initial validations study, data was used from the MacArthur Successful Aging Study that pertains to levels of
physiologic activity across a range of important regulatory systems, including the hypothalamic-pituitaryadrenal and sympathetic nervous systems as well as the
cardiovascular system and metabolic processes (Seeman et al. 1997a). The measure of allostatic load reflects
only one of the two aspects of physiologic activity postulated to contribute to allostatic load, namely, higher,
chronic, steady state levels of activity related to the diurnal variation as well as any residual activity reflecting chronic stress or failure to shut-off responses to
acute stressors.
The parameters that have been measured for determining allostatic load scores are summarized in Table
1. The initial estimate of allostatic load was created by
summing across indices of subjects’ status with respect
to these ten components of allostatic load. For each of
the ten indicators, subjects were classified into quartiles
based on the distribution of scores in the high function
cohort (see Seeman et al. 1997a). The decision to use distributions in the high function cohort was based on the
fact that analyses of relationships between allostatic
load and health outcomes were based on longitudinal
data for this latter group. Allostatic load was measured
by summing the number of parameters for which the
subject fell into the “highest” risk quartile (i.e., top

112 B.S. McEwen

quartile for all parameters except HDL cholesterol and
DHEA-S for which membership in the lowest quartile
corresponds to highest risk).
Several alternative criteria for calculating allostatic
load were also examined. One such alternative, using a
stricter criterion, was based on a sum of the number of
parameters for which the subject fell into the top (or
bottom) 10% of the distribution (i.e., the group at highest “risk”). Another measure of allostatic load was
based on averaging z-scores for each of the parameters.
In each case, analyses yielded essentially the same results as the measure based on the quartile criteria,
though the latter showed the strongest effects. These
concurrent results suggest to us that the disease risks
associated with allostatic load derive (as the original
conceptualization would argue) from being relatively
higher on various measures of physiologic regulation
rather than only at the most extreme levels. At the same
time, simply averaging levels of activity across systems
may tend to obscure the impact of elevations in a subset
of systems that contribute to higher allostatic load.
Thus, we select an algorithm for allostatic load that
avoids the problem of averaging, using instead a count
of the number of parameters for which subjects exhibited relatively elevated levels. The 10 components were
equally weighted since, based on factor analysis, indicators from physiologic systems defined different factors,
and the component loadings on the relevant factors
were virtually the same. This measure of allostatic load
was then examined for its ability to predict health outcomes over a 2.5 year follow-up. Higher baseline allostatic load scores were found to predict significantly increased risks for incident cardiovascular disease (CVD)
as well as increased risks for decline in physical and
cognitive functioning and for mortality (Seeman et al.
1997b).

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

One of the problems with the original conceptualization of allostatic load and its measurement is that the
components were not organized and categorized with
regard to what each measure represents in the cascade
of events that lead from allostasis to allostatic load. Nor
was there any suggested organization in choosing those
original measures that would facilitate systematically
relating measures to specific disease outcomes or systematically adding new measures. Allostasis and allostatic load are concepts that are mechanistically based
and only as good as the information about mechanisms
that lead to disease.
A new way of classifying the measures must provide
a handle for relating what is measured to a pathophysiological process and allow for the incorporation of new
measures as more is known about underlying mechanisms leading to disease (McEwen and Seeman 1999).
This new formulation is based upon the notion of primary mediators leading to primary effects and then to secondary outcomes. These lead, finally, to tertiary outcomes
that represent actual diseases. In the original allostatic
load measures summarized in Table 1, cortisol, adrenalin, noradrenalin, and DHEA are primary mediators,
whereas the other six represent secondary outcomes. In
a new study from the MacArthur Successful Aging data
collection, the four primary mediators predicted both
mortality over four years as powerfully as the six secondary outcomes shown in Table 1 (Seeman et al. 1997b).

THE ROLE OF BEHAVIOR IN
ALLOSTATIC LOAD
Behavioral responses to challenge also lead to protective and damaging effects and produce a form of allo-

Table 1. Measures of Allostatic Load
Systolic and diastolic blood pressure
Indices of cardiovascular activity.
Waist-hip ratio
An index of more chronic levels of metabolism and adipose tissue deposition, thought to be
influenced by increased glucocorticoid activity.
Serum HDL and total cholesterol
Related to the development of atherosclerosis—increased risks being seen with higher levels in
the case of total cholesterol and lower levels in the case of HDL.
Blood plasma levels of glycosylated hemoglobin
An integrated measure of glucose metabolism over several days time.
Serum dihydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S)
A functional HPA axis antagonist.
Over-night urinary cortisol excretion.
An integrated measure of 12-hr HPA axis activity.
Overnight urinary noradrenalin and adrenalin excretion
Integrated indices of 12-hr sympathetic nervous systems activity.
Note: cortisol, noradrenalin, adrenalin, and DHEA are referred to in the text as the four primary mediators.
For details, see Seeman et al. 1997b.

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

static load. An individual’s behavior can increase or decrease further risk for harm or disease—for example,
antisocial responses such as hostility and aggression vs.
cooperation and conciliation; risk taking behaviors such
as smoking, drinking, and physical risk-taking vs. self
protection; poor diet and health practices vs. good diet
and exercise. In so far as the behavioral response, such
as smoking or alcohol consumption, may have at least
perceived adaptive effects in the short run but damaging effects in the long run, the linkage of “allostasis”
and “allostatic load” is applicable to behavioral responses as well as to physiological responses to
challenge.
However, there is another important role or behavior
relation to allostatic load, namely, that behavior and
cognition play an important role in determining what is
stressful, and individuals differ in at least three principal ways in how they respond to potentially-stressful
situations (see Figure 2). The first is interpretation of an
event—if a situation is viewed as threatening, then the
brain may initiate behaviors that avoid the threat or, alternatively, it may produce behaviors that can increase
danger. The brain also regulates the hormonal physiological responses that, as discussed above, protect in the
short run but which, over months or years, can cause
wear and tear on the body. On the other hand, perceiving an event as non-threatening may have very little
cost providing that there is really no danger involved,
whereas perceiving as threatening situations that are
not dangerous can lead to a high cost in physiological
over-reactions and wasted behavior. In an example
cited above, those individuals who failed to habituate
their cortisol response in a public speaking challenge
lacked in self-confidence and felt continually threatened (Kirschbaum et al. 1995). Individual differences
are also seen in cardiovascular activity, e.g., blood pressure responses to a laboratory stressor predicted elevated ambulatory blood pressure during periods of
perceived stress (Matthews et al. 1992). Moreover, as
noted above, a parental history of hypertension appears
to predict the duration of the blood pressure response
to an acute stressor (Gerin and Pickering 1995).
Another relevant aspect of individual differences
concerns the condition of the body itself. People who
are in good physical condition can handle strenuous exercise far better than those not in shape. Thus, personal
behavior involving exercise is very important: for example, exercise can have a rapid effect to increase muscle glucose utilization (Perseghin et al. 1996). Moreover,
metabolic imbalances that lead to obesity and diabetes
can increase the vulnerability of an individual to stress,
and these may have a genetic component (Brindley and
Rolland 1989). For Type I diabetes, life stressors increase the incidence and severity of the disease in children (Hafflof et al. 1991) and the BB rat strain responds
to stress by increasing the number of individual rats

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 113

that express Type I diabetes (Lehman et al. 1991). As far
as Type II diabetes, stress increases fat deposition in experimental animals (Rebuffe-Scrive et al. 1992), and
data for humans indicates that stressful life events accelerate the course of the disease (Cox and Gonder-Frederick 1991; Surwit et al. 1991).
Third, certain personal behaviors, such as choice of
diet, smoking, alcohol intake, and exercise, are likely to
be altered by stress because they are important for some
individuals in coping with stress. And it is well known
that such behaviors influence health outcomes over
long periods of time, contributing to the physiological
allostatic load. In short, the brain controls not only the
interpretation of events as threatening or non-threatening, but it also determines the behaviors and habits that
can make life more or less dangerous to the individual
in the short run and increase allostatic load over a
lifetime.

THE RELATIONSHIPS OF GENETICS TO STRESS
AND ALLOSTATIC LOAD
Genetic factors play a major role in the risk for stressrelated disorders and allostatic load, and this is particularly true for psychiatric disorders, which are also inextricably linked to an individual’s experiences and
behavior. Genes exist in allelic variants, some of which
confer risk for certain types of diseases. For example,
the concordances among identical twins for a number
of psychiatric disorders is on the order of 0–60%, less
than 100% but higher than that for non-identical twins
and much higher than between unrelated individuals
(Plomin 1990; Plomin et al. 1994). Yet, many diseases,
including psychiatric disorders, are suspected to reflect
defects, or allelic variants, in more than one gene, and
this increases the complexity of the analysis of such disorders (see Vogel and Motulsky 1986).
Behavior plays a complex role in the expression of
genetic traits. One relevant example is contained in recent studies on depression, in which genetic risk for depression fits a model in which there is an increased
probability for the at-risk individual experiencing
stressful life events in interpersonal, work-related, and
financial domains. According to this model, it is as if
these individuals select themselves into high risk environment and thus increase the likelihood that depression will result from the stress and conflict that they
experience (Kendler 1998; Kendler and Karkowski-Shuman 1997). More generally, and as we know about the
genes that are involved in such conditions, the mapping
of the human genome and the identification of alleles of
genes that confer risk for disease opens the way for
studies of the role of specific genes and their regulation
in disease processes. However, as emphasized by the
studies noted above on depression, knowing what

114 B.S. McEwen

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Figure 2. The stress response and development of allostatic load are illustrated. Perception of stress is influenced by one’s
experiences, genetics, and behavior. When the brain perceives an experience as stressful, physiologic and behavioral
responses are initiated leading to allostasis and adaptation. Over time, allostatic load can accumulate, and the overexposure
to neural, endocrine, and immune stress mediators can have adverse effects on various organ systems, leading to disease.
Reprinted from McEwen 1998, with permission.

genes are involved in a disease is not enough. The regulation of those genes in relation to the pathophysiology
of the disease must also be elucidated, and, in the case
of mental disorders this entails much more knowledge
about the behavioral, neurochemical, and neuroanatomical features of the disorders themselves.
It is now well known that genes are regulated by
hormones, neurotransmitters and other chemical signals that are produced in response to signals from the
external and internal environment. For example, stress
is reported to activate immediate early gene expression,
and these immediate early genes, like c-fos, are believed
to activate other genes and thus regulate aspects of cell
structure and function (Imaki et al. 1992; Mansi et al.
1998; Melia et al. 1994; Nikulina et al. 1998; Watanabe et
al. 1994).

THE BRAIN AS A TARGET OF
ALLOSTATIC LOAD
Mental disorders such as depression are related to
chemical imbalances in the central nervous system that
alter interpretations of stimuli and influence behavioral
responses to potentially stressful situations. These
chemical imbalances constitute a form of allostatic load
(Schulkin et al. 1994). There are multiple transmitters
that may be subject to such imbalances, but two of
them, serotonin and corticotrophin releasing factor
(CRF), are particularly relevant for discussions of stress,
anxiety, and depression leading to allostatic load. Low
brain serotonin is linked to impulsive aggression, suicide, alcohol, and substance abuse (Brown et al. 1982;

Higley et al. 1996a; Mann 1998; Williams 1994). In addition, testosterone increases aggression and may be reciprocally-linked to serotonin, i.e., testosterone is involved in reducing the actions of serotonin, whereas
serotonin inhibits testosterone-facilitated behaviors (Higley et al. 1996b). In support of this notion, the serotonin
behavioral syndrome (SBS; a stereotyped set of postural
and motor response elicited by tryptophan administered
in the presence of pargyline) in rats is higher in females
than in males and is increased in males by castration
and suppressed by dihydrotestosterone administration,
suggesting an effect mediated by androgen receptors
(Fischette et al. 1984).
At the same time, social ordering in animals changes
brain chemistry, as seen in dominance hierarchies
among laboratory animals, and this has an impact on
expression of certain neurochemical systems. For example, CRF is not only a key hypothalamic hormone that
regulates ACTH release but it is also a neurotransmitter
that regulates autonomic nervous system activity and
ingestive behavior. CRF gene expression is elevated in
both dominant and subordinate rats after chronic psychosocial stress in the amygdala (Albeck et al. 1997), a
brain area involved in memory associated with powerful emotions (Ledoux 1996). Yet, hypothalamic CRF expression, which controls the pituitary production of
ACTH, is deficient in subordinate rats that are most severely affected by the psychosocial stress experience, as
indicated by their having extremely low levels of testosterone (Albeck et al. 1997; Blanchard et al. 1993). This
reduced hypothalamic CRF is linked to a failure to
show a hormonal stress response in this subgroup or
subordinate rats (Albeck et al. 1997). On the other hand,

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

the increase in amygdala CRF mRNA levels is important in light of the finding that amygdala CRF is known
to be involved in stress-induced anxiety behaviors
(Swiergiel et al. 1993; Wiersma et al. 1995).
The amygdala and extended amygdala provide one
source of extra-hypothalamic CRF, which is known to
be elevated in primates that are anxious as a result of
deprivation of maternal care (Coplan et al. 1996) and in
individuals with PTSD (Bremner et al. 1997a). In contrast
to the hypothalamic CRF system, which is suppressed
by glucocorticoids, stress and glucocorticoids enhance
expression of the amygdala and extended amygdala
CRF system (for review see Schulkin et al. 1998).
Chemical imbalances in neurotransmitters can be the
cause and/or the result of fear and traumatic experiences. The “flash bulb” memories of events associated
with strong emotions, including both fear and also positive emotions, involve the amygdala (Ledoux 1996).
The pathway for encoding these memories involves the
interaction between neurotransmitters in the amygdala
and the hippocampus, facilitated by circulating stress
hormones of the adrenal cortex and adrenal medulla.
Indeed, encoding of these memories is strengthened by
glucocorticoids and noradrenalin acting in the amygdala
and hippocampus, among other brain regions, and epinephrine acting in the sensory vagus outside of the
blood-brain barrier, with information transmitted into
the brain via the nucleus of the solitary tract (Cahill et
al. 1994; McGaugh et al. 1996; de Quervain et al. 1998;
Roozendaal et al. 1996). These findings may have some
relevance to PTSD and also to symptoms of depression,
in which an overactive amygdala appears to be involved (Cahill and McGaugh 1998; Drevets et al. 1992,
1997; Sheline et al. 1998).
At the same time as the brain encodes information
and controls the behavioral responses, it is also changed
structurally and chemically by those experiences (Greenough and Bailey 1988; Guzowski and McGaugh 1997;
Martin and Kandel 1996). While short-term response of
the brain to novel and potentially-threatening situations may be adaptive and result in new learning and
acquired behavioral strategies for coping, as may be the
case for certain types of fear-related memories, repeated
stress can cause cognitive impairment via at least four
different mechanisms (McEwen 1997, 1999). The first is
the compromising of neuronal excitability, which is a
relatively rapid and reversible process (Joels and
Vreugdenhil 1998; Pavlides et al. 1995). The second is
by causing atrophy of nerve cells in the Ammon’s horn
region of the hippocampus through a process that is
again reversible, although over days or weeks rather
than hours (Magarinos et al. 1997; McEwen 1999). A
third process involves the inhibition of neurogenesis in
the dentate gyrus region of the hippocampus (Gould et
al. 1998). The fourth process involving prolonged and
extreme psychosocial stress can lead, over months to

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 115

years, to permanent loss of nerve cells in hippocampus
(Uno et al. 1989). Each of these processes may be occurring somewhat independently of each other and contribute in various degrees to different pathophysiological
situations involving traumatic stress, depression or aging.
The hippocampus is important in declarative, spatial, and contextual memory and plays a role in processing of the contextual associations of strong emotions
(Eichenbaum 1997; Gray 1982; Kim and Fanselow 1992;
Phillips and LeDoux 1992; Pugh et al. 1997). Atrophy of
the human hippocampus is reported in some individual
animals (Meaney et al. 1988) and humans (Lupien et al.
1994, 1998) as they age and is accompanied by cognitive
impairment. Hippocampal atrophy and cognitive impairment is also reported in Cushing’s syndrome,
PTSD, schizophrenia, mild cognitive impairment during aging and recurrent major depression (for reviews,
see McEwen 1997; Sapolsky 1996). In these disorders,
the hippocampus is likely not to be the only brain area
affected in this way, since atrophy of the amygdala and
prefrontal cortex have also been reported in depressive
illness (Drevets et al. 1997; Sheline et al. 1998, 1999). Reversibility and/or preventability of such atrophy is an
important practical issue in devising treatments not
only for depressive illness, but also for PTSD, schizophrenia and mild cognitive impairment during aging.

EARLY LIFE EXPERIENCES
As suggested by Figure 2, the susceptibility of an individual to allostatic load is likely to reflect developmental influences as well as genetic risk factors. Indeed,
early life experiences play a powerful role in determining allostatic load over a lifetime in experimental animals, and these animal models provide an attractive
model for understanding some environmental and developmental influences upon individual differences in
human stress reactivity. Neonatal “handling” of newborn rats produces animals that have lower HPA reactivity and slower rates of brain aging; these are measured in terms of loss of cognitive function; in contrast,
prenatal or postnatal stress is suspected of causing increased HPA reactivity over a lifetime and to lead to increased rates of brain aging (see Dellu et al. 1994; Liu et
al. 1997; Meaney et al. 1988). A likely mechanism for the
effects of “handling” is the maternal licking and grooming behavior towards the pup, which is enhanced by
the brief (15 minutes) separation of pup from mother,
with pups from mothers showing higher amounts of
licking and grooming displaying lower levels of stress
hormone reactivity as adults (Liu et al. 1997). More prolonged maternal separation (180 minutes) fails to have
this effect and, in fact, shows signs of producing the opposite effect, namely, to increase stress hormone production later in life (Plotsky and Meaney 1993).

116 B.S. McEwen

There are individual differences in human brain aging related to elevated cortisol levels (see Lupien et al.
1994, 1998; Seeman et al. 1997), although their connection to early life events is unknown. Yet, there are now
indications in studies on human development that
events early in life produce long-term effects upon the
activity of systems producing hormonal stress mediators. Although the evidence is not extensive, the initial
reports encourage further investigation. For example,
phenomena such as low birthweight and various types
of early life trauma may influence stress hormone responsiveness over a lifetime. Evidence that extremely
low birthweight, which may be caused, at least in part, by
stress to the mother, is a risk factor for Type II diabetes is
one indication of a life-long influence of early life events
(see Barker 1997; Wadhwa 1998; Wadhwa et al. 1993).
Moreover, experiences in childhood have other, deleterious consequences. For example, a recent report indicates that a history of sexual and physical abuse in
childhood is a risk factor not only for PTSD but also for
hippocampal atrophy and cognitive impairment in
adulthood (Bremner et al. 1997b). A very recent study
on adolescents with a history of childhood physical and
sexual abuse has revealed a pattern of elevated urinary
secretion of catecholamines in those with PTSD compared to two control groups, non-traumatized children
with over-anxious disorder and healthy controls; in addition, urinary free cortisol was higher in PTSD children than healthy controls (DeBellis et al. 1999a). These
results point to an increased activity, or allostatic load,
within the stress hormone axis. A related study on maltreated children with PTSD revealed the presence of
smaller intracranial and cerebral volumes compared to
matched controls; however, there was no indication of
smaller hippocampal volumes in these subjects, in contrast to the adult PTSD subjects with a history of childhood abuse described above (DeBellis et al. 1999b). These
findings are consistent with a previous, qualitative
study that reported electrophysiological abnormalities
from EEG records in children with a history of psychological, physical, and sexual abuse (Ito et al. 1993).
However, the lack of hippocampal atrophy in children
with PTSD suggests that this process is a gradual one
that occurs later in life with the repetition of the PTSD
state over many years.
There are also indications that abuse and neglect in
childhood are risk factors for increased mortality and
morbidity from a variety of disorders during adult life,
including depression, suicide substance abuse, CVD,
and extreme obesity (Felitti et al. 1998). In other words,
the reported effects of trauma and other childhood adversities are very broad and do not appear specific for
any one type of psychiatric or other disorder (Kessler et
al. 1997). Moreover, the breadth and strength of the effects of such trauma is reminiscent of the broad systemic effects of alterations of the responsiveness of

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

physiological mediators that is embodied in the concept
of allostatic load (McEwen 1998). They are also consistent with the elevation of stress hormone activity noted
above in the abused children.
Neglect and trauma in childhood presents symptoms that are associated with other animal and human
studies showing low serotonin and risk for hostility, aggression, substance abuse, and suicide. Studies in infrahuman primates have shown that early maternal
deprivation reduces brain serotonin levels and increases alcohol preference and aggressive behavior,
while decreasing affiliative behaviors (Higley et al.
1991, 1993).

CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASE, HOSTILITY,
AND DEPRESSION
Imbalances in brain function increase allostatic load
and affect the health of other systems of the body, and
this is very well illustrated by the cardiovascular system for two disorders: hostility and major depression.
Hostility, and the resulting outbursts of anger, are associated with increased blood pressure surges and an elevated acute risk for myocardial infarction (MI) (Suarez
et al. 1998; Williams and Chesney 1993). MI has a distinct diurnal pattern of occurrence, being more frequent
in the morning, and acute stress is a major risk factor for
MI (Muller and Tofler 1990). The mechanisms are now
known for these events including the increased risk of
forming blood clots (Muller and Tofler 1990). In general, high hostility and also low SES (see below), as associated with increased CVD (Kop 1997).
Depressive illness is a disorder associated with CVD,
and there are a number of features of depression that
point to allostatic load, not only in the brain, but also in
the rest of the body. Many patients with CVD suffer
from depression, and depression and vital exhaustion
predict further worsening of CVD (Kop 1997; Kop et al.
1994; Musselman et al. 1996; Musselman 1998). In addition, for women, CVD is the leading cause of death and
there is a strong association between CVD in women
and depression (Musselman and Nemeroff 1998).
Moreover, heart-rate variability, a positive sign of cardiovascular health that is compromised in CVD and after an MI, is lower in individuals with higher depression scores (Krittayaphong et al. 1997). Likewise,
increased platelet reactivity, a sign of more rapid blood
clotting, is associated with major depression (Musselman et al. 1996), and there are indications for increased
abdominal fat deposition in major depressive illness
(Thakore et al. 1997). As noted earlier in this article, abdominal fat deposition is a sign of allostatic load that is
strongly linked to increased risk for CVD. Other aspects
of depressive illness that appear to be indices of allostatic
load include the loss of bone mineral density (Michel-

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

son et al. 1996) and atrophy of the hippocampus,
amygdala, and prefrontal cortex (Drevets et al. 1997;
Sheline et al. 1996, 1999).

SOCIOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF STRESS
AND HEALTH
We now move from considering individuals to groups
of people classified by income and education, which is
collectively referred to as SES. This is because there is
growing evidence for gradients of mortality and morbidity across the full range of SES that cannot be explained simply by access to health care or individual
factors such as amount of smoking (Adler et al. 1993,
1994). The gradients of health across the range of SES
relate to a complex array of risk factors that are differentially distributed in human society and which have a
cumulative impact on behavioral and physiological allostatic load, and CVD is among the most prominent
disorders showing an SES gradient. However, CVD is
not the only disease with an SES gradient. Figure 3 presents gradients of four disorders compared to the midSES level, which, in turn, is lower than the lowest level
of SES. In other words, the gradient is gradual and does
not dip only at the lowest SES level.
Among the underlying causal factors for the SES gradient are economic hardship and early childhood experiences. For example, a study of elderly people who had
a lifetime of sustained economic hardship pointed to a
more rapid decline of physical and mental functioning
(Lynch et al. 1997). Moreover, as noted, individuals
with a history of childhood abuse suffer greater mortality and morbidity from a range of diseases (Felitti et al.
1998).
Undoubtedly the best example of SES influences
upon health is the Whitehall studies of the British Civil
Service. In Whitehall, stepwise gradients of mortality
and morbidity were found across all six grades of the
British Civil Service in spite of the fact that all of the
studied individuals had jobs and access to health care
(Marmot et al. 1991). There are many factors that undoubtedly contribute to these gradients, including factors in the living and working environment. Not surprisingly, CVD is a frequent outcome of these gradients
and the psychosocial and environmental factors which
are responsible for the allostatic load. Based upon the
discussion of depression and CVD, one must consider
depression, as well as lack of control, as a major factor
in the allostatic load that results in hypertension, abdominal obesity, and atherosclerosis.
Hypertension was found to be a sensitive index of
job stress, particularly in factory workers, in other
workers with respective jobs and time pressures (Melin
et al. 1999), and in workers whose jobs were unstable

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 117

due to departmental privatization (Marmot, personal
communication). “Vital exhaustion” is a work-related
behavioral state, reflecting lack of perceived control
and a sense of helplessness, that correlates strongly
with increased risk for CVD (Everson et al. 1997; Keltikangas-Jarvinen et al. 1996; Kop et al. 1998; Lynch et al.
1997; Raikkonen et al. 1996). Among indices of allostatic load, plasma fibrinogen, which predicts increased risk of death from CHD, is elevated in men
in lower British Civil Service grades (Markowe et al.
1985).
Another stress-linked parameter of allostatic load
that varies across SES is abdominal obesity, measured
as increased waist/hip ratio (WHR). WHR serves as a
good index of abdominal obesity in men and women
(Schreiner et al. 1996), although among the elderly over
80 years of age a simple measure of waist circumference
is a better index of abdominal adiposity (GoodmanGruen et al. 1996). Abdominal obesity is linked to Type II
diabetes and CVD (Brindley and Rolland 1989). Prospective studies show that WHR predicts incidence of heart
disease in both women (Lapidus et al. 1984) and men
(Larsson et al. 1989). Nevertheless, fat distribution is
clearly related to circulating sex hormones, and is likely
driven in part by them. Central fat distribution is associated with increased free testosterone and DHEA sulfate
(Williams et al. 1993), as well as lower sex hormone binding globulin, luteinizing hormone, and FSH levels in
women (Kaye et al. 1991), and with reduced testosterone
and DHEA sulfate levels in men (Tcherno et al. 1996).
Thus, it appears that an androgenic profile promotes central fat deposits in women, and redistributes or prevents
central fat accumulation in men.
As to the influence of stress and the social environment, abdominal fat can be enhanced in a primate animal by psychological stress (Manuck et al. 1991). WHR
is increased at the lower end of the SES gradient in
Swedish males (Larsson et al. 1989), and WHR also increases with decreasing civil service grade in the Whitehall studies in both men and women (Brunner et al.
1997).
Immune system function is also a target of psychosocial stress. Recent evidence indicates that psychosocial
stress increases vulnerability to infections such as the
common cold (Cohen et al. 1991).
Moreover, social networks and social support reduce
incidence and severity of upper respiratory infections
(Cohen et al. 1997).
With regard to psychiatric disorders, there is some
evidence that low SES is associated with mental distress
and depression, as well as other disorders such as
schizophrenia and substance abuse (Brown and Adler
1998). However, there are questions of causality, i.e.,
does SES cause the disorder or does the disorder lead to
low SES? In the case of schizophrenia, personality disorders, substance abuse, and severe cognitive impair-

118 B.S. McEwen

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Figure 3. Gradients of four diseases as a function of socioeconomic status are illustrated. Four diseases show gradients
across the full range of socioeconomic status. Data for the following is shown in the figure: (a) Percent diagnosed osteoarthritis (Cunningham and Kelsey 1984); (b) Relative prevalence of chronic disease (Townsend 1974); (c) Prevalence of hypertension (Kraus et al. 1980); (d) Rate of cervical cancer per 100,000 (DeVasa and Diamond 1980). Republished from Adler et al.
1994, with permission.

ment, it is very likely that the conditions themselves
lead to a lower SES position (Brown and Adler 1998;
Dohrenwend et al. 1992). On the other hand, a low SES
position, reflecting poor resources, living environment
and an unsatisfying job, are likely to be a cause of depression and anxiety (Brown and Adler 1998; Dohrenwend et al. 1992). Table 2 shows gradients of affective
disorders, anxiety disorders, and substance abuse, both
as a function of income and also of education. It is noteworthy that, for education, all three disorders show a
gradient in which the lowest and middle levels of education all differ significantly from the highest level;
however, for income, both affective disorders and substance abuse show significant differences only for the
lowest income group, although anxiety disorders show
a more robust gradient in which all 3 lowest levels of
income differ significantly from the highest income
level.
It is important to point out that considerations of allostatic load and social organization go beyond the confines of organized, stable social structures. In less stable
societies, conflict and social instability have been found
to accelerate pathophysiological processes and increase

morbidity and mortality. For example, CVD is a major
contributor to the almost 40% increase in death rate
among Russian males in the social collapse following
the fall of Communism; and in these studies, CVD is a
prominent cause of death, along with alcoholism, suicide, and homicide (Bobak and Marmot 1996; Notzon et
al. 1998). In addition, self-reported health was related
inversely to material deprivation and positively related
to education level and perceived control (Bobak et al.
1998). As noted above, blood pressure surges and sustained blood pressure elevations, that are likely to occur
in unstable and stressful environments, are linked to accelerated atherosclerosis, as well as increased risk for
MI (Manuck et al. 1995; Muller and Tofler 1990).

CONCLUSIONS
The emerging concept of allostatic load provides a
means of augmenting the concept of “stress” as a conceptual and methodological basis for elucidating the
behavioral and physiological mechanisms by which

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 119

Table 2. Relative Risk for Three Disorders Involving the Nervous System
INCOME

Affective Disorders

Anxiety Disorders

Substance Abuse

$ 0 – 19K
$20 – 34K
$35 – 69K
$ . 70K

1.73*
1.13
1.01
1.00

2.12*
1.56*
1.50
1.00

1.92*
1.12
1.11
1.00

1.79*
1.38*
1.37*
1.00

2.82*
2.10*
1.60*
1.00

2.10*
1.80*
1.70*
1.00

EDUCATION
Yrs 0 – 11
Yrs 12
Yrs 13–15
Yrs . 16

Data is compliled for both income and education based upon Kessler et al. 1994 and Regier et al. 1993. Table prepared by Dr. Nancy Adler, University of California, San Francisco, as a personal communication to the author.

genes, early life experiences, living and working environment, interpersonal relationships, diet, exercise,
sleep, and other lifestyle factors all converge to affect
body chemistry, structure, and function over a life-time.
Allostatic load, which includes “stress” as well as perturbations of the diurnal rhythm of stress mediators,
and the influences of various aspects of lifestyle such as
diet and exercise, offers a beginning in this direction. It
provides, for example, a basis for understanding connections among the etiology of systemic illnesses such
as CVD and mental illnesses such as depression and the
condition of hostility. More generally, the mechanistic
focus of allostatic load forces a consideration of pathways of cause and effect on specific systems, in which
neuroendocrine factors play a major role. Moreover,
this mechanistic focus transcends individual organ systems and requires an appreciation of the multiple interactions between organ systems, particularly in cases,
such as CVD and depressive illness, where the specific
mechanisms are not intuitively obvious. Perhaps, one
of the greatest benefits of studying allostatic load will
be to force a new integration of knowledge from different fields of biomedical science.
Another aspect of this linkage of knowledge, or consilience (Wilson 1998), is the recognition of the importance of SES and health and the new found ability to
study mechanisms for the SES gradients in terms of biological behavioral and social environmental factors.
Likewise, animal studies on the exacerbating effect of
maternal deprivation early in life leading to allostatic
load later in life provides a model and adds new impetus to investigate mechanisms underlying the human
costs of early childhood abuse and neglect on behavioural disorders such as depression, suicide, and substance abuse, as well as broader aspects of pathophysiology such as CVD and cancer. It seems very probable
that early life abuse and neglect may contribute to the
SES gradients of health by contributing an extra measure of allostatic load. This is an area where further research is vitally important.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wishes to acknowledge his many colleagues associated with the MacArthur Foundation Health Program and,
in particular, Dr. Robert Rose, the Research Network for Socioeconomic Status and Health (Nancy Adler, UCSF, Chair),
and Dr. Teresa Seeman, UCLA, a member of the Network and
a key collaborator in the measurement of allostatic load. Dr.
Adler provided the data for Table 2 and Figure 3. Special
thanks is due to Dr. Judith Stewart, Network Administrator,
who helped the author with references concerning depressive
illness and early life trauma and to Grace Castellazzo, RN, the
previous Network Administrator, whose many efforts and insights catalyzed the development of the allostatic load concept. Additional special thanks to Dr. Elissa Epel, UCSF, for
providing information about waist-hip ratio in men and
women in relation to cardiovascular disease risk. Finally, the
author also wishes to dedicate this article to the memory of
the late Professor Elliot Stellar, University of Pennsylvania,
who collaborated with the author on the first paper describing
allostatic load. Research support in the author’s laboratory
that is related to work described in this article has come from
NIH Grant MH41256, the Health Foundation (New York) and
Servier (France).

REFERENCES
Adler N, Boyce WT, Chesney M, Folkman S, Syme L (1993):
Socioeconomic inequalities in health: No easy solution.
J Am Med Assoc 269:3140–3145
Adler NE, Boyce T, Chesney MA, Cohen S, Folkman S, Kahn
RL, Syme LS (1994): Socioeconomic status and health:
The challenge of the gradient. Am Psychol 49:15–24
Adler NE, Marmot M, McEwen BS (Eds), Socioeconomic status and health in industrial nations: Social, psychological and biological pathways. Annals of the New York
Academy of Science, in press
Albeck DS, McKittrick CR, Blanchard DC, Blanchard RJ,
Nikulina J, McEwen BS, Sakai RR (1997): Chronic social
stress alters levels of corticotropin-releasing factor and
arginine vasopressin mRNA in rat brain. J Neurosci
17:4895–4903
Barker DJP (1997): The fetal origins of coronary heart disease. Acta Paed Suppl 422:78–82

120 B.S. McEwen

Blanchard DC, Sakai RR, McEwen BS, Weiss SM, Blanchard
RJ (1993): Subordination stress: Behavioral, brain and
neuroendocrine correlates. Behav Brain Res 58:113–121
Bobak M, Marmot M (1996): East-West mortality divide and
its potential explanations: Proposed research agenda. Br
Med J 312:421–425
Bobak M, Pikhart H, Hertzman C, Rose R, Marmot M (1998):
Socioeconomic factors, perceived control and selfreported health in Russia. A cross-sectional survey. Soc
Sci Med 47:269–279
Bremner JD, Liciono J, Darnell A, Krystal JH, Owens MJ, Southwick SM, Nemeroff CB, Charney DS (1997a): Elevated CSF
corticotropin-releasing factor concentrations in post-traumatic stress disorder. Am J Psychiatry 154:624–629
Bremner JD, Randall P, Vermetten E, Staib L, Bronen RA,
Mazure C, Capelli S, McCarthy RB, Charney DS
(1997b): Magnetic resonance imaging-based measurement of hippocampal volume in post-traumatic stress
disorder related to childhood physical and sexual
abuse—a preliminary report. Biol Psychiatry 41:23–32
Brindley D, Rolland Y (1989): Possible connections between
stress, diabetes, obesity, hypertension and altered lipoprotein metabolism that may result in atherosclerosis.
Clin Sci 77:453–461
Brown GL, Ebert MH, Goyer DC (1982): Aggression, suicide
and serotonin: Relationships to CSF amine metabolites.
Am J Psychiatry 139:741–746
Brown HD, Adler NE (1998): Socioeconomic Status. In Friedman HS (ed), Encyclopedia of Mental Health. San
Diego, CA, Academic Press, pp 555–561
Brunner EJ, Marmot MG, Nanchalal K, Shipley MJ, Stansfeld
SA, Juneja M, Alberti KGMM (1997): Social inequality in
coronary risk: Central obesity and the metabolic syndrome. Evidence from the Whitehall II study. Diabetologia 40:1341–1349
Buske-Kirschbaum A, Jobst S, Wustmans A, Kirschbaum C,
Rauth W, Hellhammer DH (1997): Attenuated free cortisol response to psychosocial stress in children with
atopic dermatitis. Psychosom Med 59:419–426

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Crofford LJ, Pillemer SR, Kalogeras K, Cash JM, Michelson
D, Kling MA, Sternberg EM, Gold PW, Chrousos GP,
Wilder RL (1994): Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
perturbations in patients with fibromyalgia. Arthritis
Rheum 37:1583–1592
Cunningham LS, Kelsey JL (1984): Epidemiology of musculoskeletal impairments and associated disability. Am J
Public Health 74:474–527
De Bellis MD, Baum AS, Birmaher B, Keshavan MD, Eccard
CH, Boring AM, Jenkins FJ, Ryan ND (1999a): Developmental traumatology Part I: Biological stress systems.
Biol Psychiatry 45:1259–1270
De Bellis MD, Keshaven MS, Clark DB, Casey BJ, Giedd JN,
Boring AM, Frustaci K, Ryan ND (1999b): Developmental traumatology Part II: Brain development. Biol Psychiatry 45:1271–1284
Dellu F, Mayo W, Vallee M, LeMoal M, Simon H (1994):
Reactivity to novelty during youth as a predictive factor
of cognitive impairment in the elderly: A longitudinal
study in rats. Brain Res. 653:51–56
de Quervain DJF, Roozendaal B, McGaugh JL (1998): Stress
and glucocorticoids impair retrieval of long-term spatial memory. Nature 394:787–790
DeVasa SS, Diamond EL (1980): Association of breast cancer
and cervical cancer incidences with income and education among whites and blacks. J Natl Cancer Inst
65:515–528
Dohrenwend BP, Levav I, Shrout PE, Schwartz S, Naveh G,
Link BG, Skodol AE, Stueve A (1992): Socioeconomic
status and psychiatric disorders: The causation-selection issue. Science 255:946–952
Drevets WC, Price JL, Simpson TR Jr, Todd RD, Reich T,
Vannier M, Raichle ME (1997): Subgenual prefrontal
cortex abnormalities in mood disorders. Nature
386:824–827
Drevets WC, Videen TO, Price JL, Preskorn SH, Carmichael
ST, Raichle ME (1992): A functional anatomical study of
unipolar depression. J Neurosci 12:3628–3641

Cahill L, McGaugh JL (1998): Mechanisms of emotional
arousal and lasting declarative memory. TINS 21:294–299

Eichenbaum H (1997): How does the brain organize memories? Science 277:330–332

Cahill L, Prins B, Weber M, McGaugh JL (1994): Beta-Adrenergic activation and memory for emotional events.
Nature 371:702–704

Everson SA, Lynch JW, Chesney MA, Kaplan GA, Goldberg
DE, Shade SB, Cohen RD, Salonen R, Salonen JT (1997):
Interaction of workplace demands and cardiovascular
reactivity in progression of carotid atherosclerosis: population based study. Br Med J 314:553–558

Cohen S, Doyle WJ, Skoner DP, Rabin BS, Gwaltney JM Jr
(1997): Social ties and susceptibility to the common
cold. JAMA 277:1940–1944
Cohen S, Tyrrell DAJ, Smith AP (1991): Psychological stress
and susceptibility to the common cold. N Engl J Med
325:606–612
Coplan JD, Andrews MW, Rosenblum LA, Owens MJ, Friedman S, Gorman JM, Nemeroff CB (1996): Persistent elevations of cerebrospinal fluid concentrations of
corticotropin-releasing factor in adult nonhuman primates exposed to early-life stressors: Implications for
the pathophysiology of mood and anxiety disorders.
Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:1619–1623
Cox DJ, Gonder-Frederick LA (1991): The role of stress in
diabetes mellitus. In McCabe PM, Schneiderman N,
Field TM, Skyler JS (eds), Stress, Coping and Disease.
Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum Association, pp 118–134

Felitti VJ, Anda RF, Nordenberg D, Williamson DF, Spitz
AM, Edwards V, Koss MP, Marks JS (1998): Relationship of childhood abuse and household dysfunction to
many of the leading causes of death in adults. The
adverse childhood experiences (ACE) study. Am J Prev
Med 14:245–258
Fischette C, Biegon A, McEwen BS (1984): Sex steroid modulation of serotonin behaviors syndrome. Life Sci
35:1197–1206
Gerin W, Pickering TG (1995): Association between delayed
recovery of blood pressure after acute mental stress and
parental history of hypertension. J Hyperten 13:603–610
Goodman-Gruen D, Barrett-Connor E (1996): Sex differences
in measures of body fat and body fat distribution in the
elderly. Am J Epidemiol 143:898–906

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Gould E, Tanapat P, McEwen BS, Flugge G, Fuchs E (1998):
Proliferation of granule cell precursors in the dentate
gyrus of adult monkeys is diminished by stress. Proc
Natl Acad Sci USA 95:3168–3171
Gray J (1982): Precis of the neuropsychology of anxiety: An
enquiry into the functions of the septohippocampal system. Behav Brain Sci 5:469–534
Greenough WT, Bailey CH (1988): The anatomy of a memory: convergence of results across a diversity of tests.
TINS 11:142–147
Guzowski JF, McGaugh HL (1997): Antisense oligodeoxynucleotide-mediated disruption of hippocampal cAMP
response element binding protein levels impairs consolidation of memory for water maze training. Proc Natl
Acad Sci USA 94:2693–2698
Hafflof B, Bloom L, Dahlquist G, Lonnberg G, Sahlin B
(1991): The Swedish childhood diabetes study: indications of severe psychological stress as a risk factor for
Type I (insulin-dependent): Diabetes mellitus in childhood. Diabetologia 34:579–583
Heim C, Ehlert U, Hanker J, Hellhammer DH (1998): Abuserelated post-traumatic stress disorder and alterations of
the hypothalamo-pituitary adrenal axis in women with
chronic pelvic pain. Psychosom Med 60:309–318
Higley JD, Hasert MF, Suomi SJ, Linnoila M (1991): Nonhuman primate model of alcohol abuse: Effects of early
experience, personality, and stress on alcohol consumption. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 88:7261–7265
Higley JD, Mehlman PT, Higley SB, Fernald B, Vickers J,
Lindell SG, Taub DM, Suomi SJ, Linnoila M (1996a):
Excessive mortality in young free-ranging male nonhuman primates with low cerebrospinal fluid 5-hydroxyindolecetic acid concentrations. Arch Gen Psychiatry
53:537–543
Higley JD, Mehlman PT, Poland RE, Taub DM, Vickers J,
Suomi SJ, Linnoila M (1996b): CSF testosterone and
5-HIAA correlate with different types of aggressive
behaviors. Biol Psychiatry 40:1067–1082
Higley JD, Thompson WW, Champoux M, Goldman D,
Hasert MF, Kraemer GW, Scanlan JM, Suomi SJ, Linnoila M (1993): Paternal and maternal genetic and environmental contributions to cerebrospinal fluid monoamine
metabolites in Rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta). Arch
Gen Psychiatry 50:615–623
Imaki T, Shibasaki T, Hotta M, Demura H (1992): Early
induction of c-fos precedes increased expression of corticotropin-releasing factor messenger ribonucleic acid
in the paraventricular nucleus after immobilization
stress. Endocrinology 131:240–246
Ito Y, Teicher MH, Glod CA, Harper D, Magnus E, Gelbard
HA (1993): Increased prevalence of electrophysiological
abnormalities in children with psychological, physical,
and sexual abuse. J Neuropsychiatry 5:401–408

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 121

pituitary and adrenal hormones: Implications for the
insulin resistance syndrome. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc
Biol 16:275–280
Kendler KS (1998): Major depression and the environment:
A psychiatric genetic perspective. Pharmacopsychiatry
31:5–9
Kendler KS, Karkowski-Shuman L (1997): Stressful life events
and genetic liability to major depression: Genetic control
of exposure to the environment? Psychol Med 27:359–547
Kessler RC (1997): The effects of stressful life events on
depression. Ann Rev Psychol 48:191–214
Kessler RC, Davis CG, Kendler KS (1997): Childhood adversity and adult psychiatric disorder in the US National
Comorbidity Survey. Psychol Med 27:1101–1119
Kessler RC, McGonagle KA, Zhao S, Nelson CB, Hughes M,
Eshleman S, Wittchen HU, Kendler KS (1994): Lifetime
and 12-month prevalence of DSM-III-R psychiatric disorders in the United States: Results from the National
Comorbidity Survey. Arch Gen Psychiatry 51:8–19
Kim JJ, Fanselow MS (1992): Modality-specific retrograde
amnesia of fear. Science 256:675–677
Kirschbaum C, Kudielka BM, Gaab J, Schommer NC, Hellhammer DH (1999): Impact of gender, menstrual cycle
phase and oral contraceptives on the activity of the
hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. Psychosom Med
61:154–162
Kirschbaum C, Prussner JC, Stone AA, Federenko I, Gaab J,
Lintz D, Schommer N, Hellhammer DH (1995): Persistent high cortisol responses to repeated psychological
stress in a subpopulation of healthy men. Psychosom
Med 57:468–474
Kop WJ (1997): Acute and chronic psychological risk factors
for coronary syndromes: Moderating effects of coronary
artery disease severity. J Psychosom Res 43:167–181
Kop WJ, Appels APWM, Mendes de Leon CF, de Swart HB,
Bar FW (1994): Vital exhaustion predicts new cardiac
events after successful coronary angioplasty. Psychosom Med 56:281–287
Kop WJ, Hamulyak K, Pernot C, Appels A (1998): Relationship of blood coagulation and fibrinolysis to vital
exhaustion. Psychosom Med 60:352–358
Kraus JF, Borhani NO, Franti CE (1980): Socioeconomic status, ethnicity, and risk of coronary heart disease. Am J
Epidemiol 111:407–414
Krittayaphong R, Cascio WE, Light KC, Sheffield D, Golden
RN, Finkel JB, Glekas G, Koch GG, Sheps DS (1997):
Heart rate variability in patients with coronary artery
disease: differences in patients with higher and lower
depression scores. Psychol Med 59:231–235

Joels M, Vreugdenhil E (1998): Corticosteroids in the brain.
Mol Neurobiol 17:87–198

Lapidus L, Bengtsson T, Hallstrom T, Bjorntorp P (1984):
Distribution of adipose tissue and risk of cardiovascular
disease and death: A 12-year follow-up of participants
in the population study of women in Gothenburg, Sweden. Brit Med J 289:1257–1261

Kaye S, Folsom A, Soler J, Prineas R, Potter J (1991): Associations of body mass and fat distribution with sex hormone concentrations in postmenopausal women. Intl J
Epidemiol 20:151–156

Larsson B, Seidell J, Svardsudd K, Welin L, Tibblin G, Wilhelmesen L, Bjorntorp P (1989): Obesity, adipose tissue
distribution and health in men—The Study of Men Born
in 1912. Appetite 13:37–44

Keltikangas-Jarvinen L, Raikkonen K, Hautanen A, Adlercreutz H (1996): Vital exhaustion, anger expression, and

Ledoux JE (1996): The Emotional Brain. New York, Simon
and Schuster

122 B.S. McEwen

Lehman C, Rodin J, McEwen BS, Brinton R (1991): Impact of
environmental stress on the expression of insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus. Behav Neurosci 105:241–245
Leibowitz SF, Hoebel BG (1997): Behavioral Neuroscience of
Obesity. In Bray GA, Bouchard C, James WPT (eds),
Handbook of Obesity, Chapter 15. New York, Marcel
Dekker, pp 313–358
Leproult R, Copinschi G, Buxton O, Van Cauter E (1997):
Sleep loss results in an elevation of cortisol levels the
next evening. Sleep 20:865–870
Liu D, Diorio J, Tannenbaum B, Caldji C, Francis D, Freedman A, Sharma S, Pearson D, Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ
(1997): Maternal care, hippocampal glucocorticoid
receptors, and hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal responses
to stress. Science 277:1659–1662
Lupien S, Lecours AR, Lussier I, Schwartz G, Nair NPV,
Meaney MJ (1994): Basal cortisol levels and cognitive
deficits in human aging. J Neurosci 14:2893–2903
Lupien SJ, DeLeon MJ, De Santi S, Convit A, Tarshish C,
Nair NPV, Thakur M, McEwen BS, Hauger RL, Meaney
MJ (1998): Cortisol levels during human aging predict
hippocampal atrophy and memory deficits. Nature
Neurosci 1:69–73
Lynch J, Krause N, Kaplan GA, Tuomilehto J, Salonen JT
(1997): Workplace conditions, socioeconomic status,
and the risk of mortality and acute myocardial infarction: The Kuopio Ischemic Heart Disease Risk Factor
Study. Am J Public Health 87:617–622
Lynch JW, Kaplan GA, Shema SJ (1997): Cumulative impact of
sustained economic hardship on physical, cognitive, psychological, and social functioning. NEJM 337:1889–1895
Magarinos AM, Verdugo Garcia JM, McEwen BS (1997):
Chronic Restraint Stress Alters Synaptic Terminal Structure in Hippocampus. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA
94:14002–14008
Mann JJ (1998): The neurobiology of suicide. Nature Med
4:25–30
Mansi JA, Rivest S, Drolet G (1998): Effect of immobilization
stress on transcriptional activity of inducible immediate-early genes, corticotropin-releasing factor, its type 1
receptor, and enkephalin in the hypothalamus of borderline hypertensive rats. J Neurochem 70:1556–1566
Manuck SB, Kaplan JR, Adams MR, Clarkson TB (1995):
Studies of psychosocial influences on coronary artery
atherosclerosis in cynomolgus monkeys. Health Psychol 7:113–124
Manuck SB, Kaplan JR, Muldoon MF, Adams MR, Clarkson
TB (1991): The behavioral exacerbation of atherosclerosis and its inhibition by propranolol. In McCabe PM,
Schneiderman N, Field TM, Skyler JS, (eds), Stress, Coping and Disease. Hove and London, Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, pp 51–72

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

CREB, and the formation of new synaptic connections.
Neuron 17:567–570
Matthews KA, Owens JF, Allen MkT, Stoney CM (1992): Do
cardiovascular responses to laboratory stress relate to
ambulatory blood pressure levels: yes, in some of the
people, some of the time. Psychosom Med 54:686–697
McEwen BS (1997): Possible mechanisms for atrophy of the
human hippocampus. Mol Psychiatry 2:255–262
McEwen BS (1998): Protective and damaging effects of stress
mediators. New Engl J Med 338:171–179
McEwen BS (1999): Stress and hippocampal plasticity. Ann
Rev Neurosci 22:105–122
McEwen BS, Seeman T (1999): Protective and damaging
effects of mediators of stress: Elaborating and testing
the concepts of allostasis and allostatic load. Ann NY
Acad Sci, in press
McEwen BS, Stellar E (1993): Stress and the Individual:
Mechanisms leading to disease. Arch Internal Med
153:2093–2101
McGaugh JL, Cahill L, Roozendaal B (1996): Involvement of
the amygdala in memory storage: Interaction with other
brain systems. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:13508–13514
Meaney M, Aitken D, Berkel H, Bhatnager S, Sapolsky R
(1988): Effects of neonatal handling of age-related
impairments associated with the hippocampus. Science
239:766–768
Melia KR, Ryabinin AE, Schroeder R, Bloom FE, Wilson MC
(1994): Induction and habituation of immediate early
gene expression in rat brain by acute and repeated
restraint stress. J Neurosci 14:5929–5938
Melin B, Lundberg U, Soderlund J, Granqvist M (1999): Psychological and physiological stress reactions of male
and female assembly workers: A comparison between
two different forms of work organization. J Org Behav
20:47–61
Michelson D, Stratakis C, Hill L, Reynolds J, Galliven E,
Chrousos G, Gold P (1996): Bone mineral density in
women with depression. N Engl J Med 335:1176–1181
Muller JE, Tofler GH (1990): A symposium: Triggering and
circadian variation of onset of acute cardiovascular disease. Am J Cardiol 66:1–70
Musselman DL, Nemeroff CB (1998): Women, depression,
and cardiovascular disease. Female Pat 23:23
Musselman DL, Tomer A, Manatunga AK, Knight BT, Porter
MR, Kasey S, Marzec U, Harker LA, Nemeroff CB
(1996): Exaggerated platelet reactivity in major depression. Am J Psychiatry 153:1313–1317
Musselman DL, Evans DL, Nemeroff DB (1998): The relationship of depression to cardiovascular disease. Arch
Gen Psychiatry 55:580–592

Markowe HLJ, Marmot MG, Shipley MJ, Bulpitt CJ, Meade
TW, Stirling Y, Vickers MV, Semmence A (1985): Fibrinogen: A possible link between social class and coronary
heart disease. Br Med J 291:1312–1314

Nikulina EM, Marchand JE, Kream RM, Miczek KA (1998):
Behavioral sensitization to cocaine after a brief social
stress is accompanied by changes in Fos expression in
the murine brainstem. Brain Res 810:200–210

Marmot MG, Davey Smith G, Stansfeld S, Patel C, North F,
Head J, White I, Brunner E, Feeney A (1991): Health inequalities among British civil servants: The Whitehall II
study. Lancet 337:1387–1393

Notzon FC, Komarov YM, Ermakov SP, Sempos CT, Marks
JS, Sempos EV (1998): Causes of declining life expectancy in Russia. JAMA 279:793–800

Martin KC, Kandel ER (1996): Cell adhesion molecules,

Pavlides C, Kimura A, Magarinos AM, McEwen BS (1995):
Hippocampal homosynaptic long-term depression/

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

depotentiation induced by adrenal steroids. Neuroscience 68:379–385
Perseghin G, Price TB, Petersen KF, Roden M, Cline GW,
Gerow K, Rothman DL, Shulman GI (1996): Increased
glucose transport-phosphorylation and muscle glycogen synthesis after exercise training in insulin-resistant
subjects. New Engl J Med 335:1357–1362
Phillips RG, LeDoux JE (1992): Differential contribution of
amygdala and hippocampus to cued and contextual
fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci 106:274–285
Plat L, Leproult R, L’Hermite-Baleriaux M, Fery F, Mockel J,
Polonsky KS, Van Cauter E (1999): Metabolic effects of
short-term elevations of plasma cortisol are more pronounced in the evening than in the morning. J Clin
Endocrinol Metab 84:3082–3092
Plomin R (1990): The role of inheritance in behavior. Science
48:183–188
Plomin R, Owen MJ, McGuffin P (1994): The genetic basis of
complex human behaviors. Science 264:1733–1739
Plotsky PM, Meaney MJ (1993): Early, postnatal experience
alters hypothalamic corticotropin-releasing (CRF):
mRNA, median eminence CRF content and stressinduced release in adult rats. Mol Brain Res 18:195–200
Poteliakhoff A (1981): Adrenocorticol activity and some clinical findings in acute and chronic fatigue. J Psychosom
Res 25:91–95
Pugh CR, Tremblay D, Fleshner M, Rudy JW (1997): A selective role for corticosterone in contextual-fear conditioning. Behav Neurosci 111:503–511
Raikkonen K, Hautanen A, Keltikangas-Jarvinen L (1996):
Feelings of exhaustion, emotional distress, and pituitary
and adrenocortical hormones in borderline hypertension. J Hyperten 14:713–718
Rebuffe-Scrive M, Walsh U, McEwen BS, Rodin J (1992):
Effect of chronic stress and exogenous glucocorticoids
on regional fat distribution and metabolism. Physiol
Behav 52:585–590
Regier DA, Farmer ME, Rae DS, Myers JK, Kramer M, Robins LN, George L, Karno M, Locke BZ (1993): Onemonth prevalence of mental disorders in the United
States and sociodemographic characteristics: The Epidemiologic Catchment Area study. Acta Psychiatrica
Scand 88:35–47

Allostasis and Allostatic Load 123

Schreiner P, Terry J, Eveans G, Hinson W, Corouse J, Heiss
G (1996): Sex-specific associations of magnetic resonance imaging-derived intra-abdominal and subcutaneous fat areas with conventional anthropometric indices.
Am J Epidemiol 144:335–345
Seeman TE, McEwen BS, Singer BH, Albert MS, Rowe JW
(1997a): Increase in urinary cortisol excretion and memory declines: MacArthur studies of successful aging. J
Clin Endocrinol Metab 82:2458–2465
Seeman TE, Singer BH, Rowe JW, Horwitz RI, McEwen BS
(1997b): Price of adaptation—allostatic load and its
health consequences: MacArthur studies of successful
aging. Arch Intern Med 157:2259–2268
Selye H (1936): A syndrome produced by diverse nocuous
agents. Nature 138:32
Sheline YI, Wang PW, Gado MH, Csemansky JC, Vannier
MW (1996): Hippocampal atrophy in recurrent major
depression. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 93:3908–3913
Sheline YI, Gado MH, Price JL (1998): Amygdala core nuclei
volumes are decreased in recurrent major depression.
NeuroReport 9:2023–2028
Sheline YI, Shanghavi M, Mintun MA, Gado MH (1999):
Depression duration but not age predicts hippocampal
volume loss in medically healthy women with recurrent
major depression. J Neurosci 19:5034–5043
Spiegel K, Leproult R, Van Cauter E (1999): Impact of sleep
debt on metabolic and endocrine function. Lancet
354:1435–1439
Sterling P, Eyer J (1988): Allostasis: A new paradigm to
explain arousal pathology. In Fisher S, Reason J, (eds),
Handbook of Life Stress, Cognition and Health. New
York: John Wiley & Sons, pp 629–649
Sternberg EM (1997): Neural-immune interactions in health
and disease. J Clin Investig 100:2641–2647
Suarez EC, Kuhn CM, Schanberg SM, Williams RB, Zimmermann EA (1998): Neuroendocrine, cardiovascular, and
emotional responses of hostile men: the role of interpersonal challenge. Psychosom Med 60:78–88
Surwit RS, Ross SL, Feinglos MN (1991): Stress, behavior
and glucose control in diabetes mellitus. In McCabe
PM, Schneiderman N, Field TM, Skyler JS (eds), Stress,
Coping and Disease. Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum Association, pp 97–117

Roozendaal B, Portillo-Marquez G, McGaugh JL (1996):
Basolateral amygdala lesions block glucocorticoidinduced modulation of memory for spatial learning.
Behav Neurosci 110:1074–1083

Swiergiel AH, Takahashi LK, Kalin NH (1993): Attention of
stress-induced behavior by antagonism of corticotropin-releasing factor receptors in the central amygdala in
the rat. Brain Res 623:229–234

Rupp A, Gause EM, Regier DA (1998): Research policy
implications of cost-of-illness studies for mental disorders. Br J Psychiatry 173:19–25

Tcherno A, Labrie F, Belagner A, Despres J (1996): Obesity
and metabolic complications: Contribution of DHEA
and other steroid hormones. J Endocrinol 150:S155–S164

Sapolsky RM (1996): Why stress is bad for your brain. Science 273:749–750

Thakore JH, Richards PJ, Reznek RH, Martin A, Dinan TG
(1997): Increased intra-abdominal fat deposition in
patients with major depressive illness as measured by
computed tomography. Biol Psychiatry 41:1140–1142

Schulkin J, Gold PW, McEwen BS (1998): Induction of corticotropin-releasing hormone gene expression by glucocorticoids: Implication for understanding the states of
fear and anxiety and allostatic load. Psychoneuroendocrinology 23:219–243
Schulkin J, McEwen BS, Gold PW (1994): Allostasis,
amygdala, and anticipatory angst. Neurosci Biobehav
Rev 18:385–396

Townsend P (1974): Inequality and the health service. Lancet
i:1179–1189
Uno H, Ross T, Else J, Suleman M, Sapolsky R (1989): Hippocampal damage associated with prolonged and fatal
stress in primates. J Neurosci 9:1709–1711
Ur E, White PD, Grossman A (1992): Hypothesis: Cytokines

124 B.S. McEwen

may be activated to cause depressive illness and chronic
fatigue syndrome. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci
241:317–322
Vogel F, Motulsky AG (1986): Human Genetics. Berlin
Heidelberg, Springer-Verlag
Wadhwa PD (1998): Prenatal stress and life-span development. In Encyclopedia of Mental Health. San Diego,
Academic Press
Wadhwa PD, Sandman CA, Porto M, Dunkel-Schetter C,
Garite TH (1993): The association between prenatal
stress and infant birth weight and gestational age at
birth: A prospective investigation. In Friedman HS (ed),
Am J Ob Gyn 169:858–865
Watanabe Y, Stone E, McEwen BS (1994): Induction and
habituation of c-FOS and ZIF/268 by acute and
repeated stressors. NeuroReport 5:1321–1324
Wiersma A, Baauw AD, Bohus B, Koolhaus JM (1995):

NEUROPSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 2000–VOL. 22, NO. 2

Behavioural activation produced by CRH but not a-helical CRH (CRH-receptor antagonist): When microinfused into the central nucleus of the amygdala under
stress-free
conditions.
Psychoneuroendocrinology
20:423–432
Williams D, Boyden T, Pamenter T, Lohman T, Going S
(1993): Relationship of body fat percentage and fat distribution with DHEA-S in pre-menopausal females.
JCEM 77:80–85
Williams RB (1994): Neurobiology, cellular and molecular
biology, and psychosomatic medicine. Psychosom Med
56:308–315
Williams RB, Chesney MA (1993): Psychosocial factors and
prognosis in established coronary artery disease. JAMA
270:1860–1861
Wilson EO (1998): Consilience: The Unity of Knowledge.
New York, Vintage Books

