Journal of Personality and Social Psychology
2005, Vol. 89, No. 3, 395– 406

Copyright 2005 by the American Psychological Association
0022-3514/05/$12.00 DOI: 10.1037/0022-3514.89.3.395

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

The Influence of Chronically and Temporarily Accessible Information on
Life Satisfaction Judgments
Ulrich Schimmack

Shigehiro Oishi

University of Toronto at Mississauga

University of Virginia

The authors examined the influence of temporarily and chronically accessible information on life
satisfaction judgments. Meta-analyses revealed high retest–reliability of life satisfaction judgments and
weak effects of the item order of domain and global satisfaction judgments. Study 1 (N ⫽ 225) failed to
replicate a widely cited finding of strong item-order effects. In Studies 2 (N ⫽ 100), 3 (N ⫽ 200), and
4 (N ⫽ 222), chronically accessible information was a strong predictor of life satisfaction judgments,
whereas item order had a relatively small effect. Study 5 (N ⫽ 651) demonstrated that the results
generalize to single item measures and judgments of shorter time periods. The results suggest that life
satisfaction judgments are more heavily based on chronically accessible than temporarily accessible
information.
Keywords: social judgments, item-order, life satisfaction, well-being, personality

The implications of context effects are self-evident. If an individual’s judgment of life satisfaction changes from assessment to
assessment as a function of the assessment context, it provides
unreliable information about the individuals’ subjective well being. “Life satisfaction judgments seem too context-dependent to
provide reliable information about a population’s well being”
(Schwarz & Strack, 1999, p. 80). As a result, life satisfaction
judgments are invalid because reliability is a prerequisite of
validity.
Reviews by personality psychologists have come to a different
conclusion (Diener & Lucas, 1999; Diener & Suh, 1999). For
example, numerous studies have demonstrated high retest stability
of life satisfaction judgments over retest intervals of weeks and
months (Pavot & Diener, 1993b) and demonstrated robust relationships between life satisfaction and personality variables. On
the basis of these findings, Diener and Suh (1999) concluded that
life satisfaction judgments are reliable and “often not as contaminated as popular lore might suggest” (Diener & Suh, 1999, p.
438).
Thus far, researchers have failed to reconcile the opposing views
of the nature and validity of life satisfaction judgments. On the one
hand, Schwarz and Strack (1999) explicitly stated that their review
“does not address how differences in personality may influence the
judgmental processes of interest here” (p. 62). On the other hand,
Diener and Lucas (1999) did not address how evidence for stable
individual differences in life satisfaction judgments can be reconciled with Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) evidence for context
effects on life satisfaction judgments.
The present article provides the first systematic attempt to
examine the joint contribution of situational and personality factors to judgments of life satisfaction. Situational effects are due to
respondents’ reliance on information that was made temporarily
accessible in an assessment situation (e.g., preceding questions,
salient comparison standards). Personality effects are due to respondents’ reliance on chronically accessible information that is
based on a subjective assessment of importance (Schimmack,

For generalization, psychologists must finally rely, as has been done
in all the older sciences, on replication (Cohen, 1994).

The contribution of situational factors and personality factors to
behavior is an old question in personality psychology (Epstein &
O’Brien, 1985; Kenrick & Funder, 1988; Roberts & Caspi, 2001).
The present article examines this question with regard to life
satisfaction judgments. Social psychologists tend to assume that
life satisfaction judgments are heavily based on situational factors
(Schwarz & Strack, 1999), whereas personality psychologists assume that personality factors are more important (Diener & Lucas,
1999). These divergent views have important implications for the
validity of life satisfaction judgments as indicators of subjective
well being.
In an influential review article, Schwarz and Strack (1999)
proposed that life satisfaction judgments are “extremely sensitive
to contextual influences” (p. 63). When life satisfaction is assessed
in a survey with other questions, they may be “subject to pronounced question order-effects because the content of preceding
questions influences the temporary accessibility of relevant information” (Schwarz & Strack, 1999, p. 79, italics added). Schwarz
and Strack concluded that life satisfaction judgments are unlikely
to be based on a “careful assessment of one’s objective conditions
in light of one’s aspirations” (p. 62). Instead, these judgments are
“better conceptualized as the result of a judgment process that is
highly context-dependent” (p. 62, italics added).

Ulrich Schimmack, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at
Mississauga, Ontario, Canada; Shigehiro Oishi, Department of Psychology, University of Virginia.
This research was supported by Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council Grant 410-2001-1650.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Ulrich
Schimmack, Department of Psychology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, 3359 Mississauga Road North, Mississauga, Ontario L5L 1C6,
Canada. E-mail: uli.schimmack@utoronto.ca
395

396

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

Diener, & Oishi, 2002). We conducted meta-analyses of the retest
stability and experimental manipulations of temporarily accessible
information to determine the effect sizes of temporarily accessible
versus chronically accessible information. In addition, we conducted several new studies to examine why some studies obtained
conflicting results.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Retest Stability of Life Satisfaction Judgments
Both sides of the debate acknowledge that retest correlations
provide important information about the relative importance of
context effects and personality effects on life satisfaction. Schwarz
and Strack (1999) explicitly made this connection when they
proposed that, “Temporarily accessible information is the basis of
most context effects in survey measurement and results in variability in the judgments when the same question is asked at
different times” (p. 63). The authors also noted that, “Other information, however, may come to mind because it is used frequently—
for example, because it relates to the respondent’s current concerns. . . Such chronically accessible information reflects
important aspects of respondents’ lives and provides for some
stability in judgments over time” (p. 63). Similarly, Diener and
Lucas (1999) concluded that effects of temporarily accessible
information are relatively weak on the basis of studies that found
high stability in life satisfaction judgments.
Although both sides agree on the theoretical implications of
retest stability, they make contradictory claims about the actual
stability of life satisfaction judgments. Diener and Lucas (1999;
see also Pavot & Diener, 1993b) cited studies with retest correlations exceeding .70 over time intervals of several months. In
contrast, Schwarz and Strack (1999) concluded that, “Measures of
SWB have low test–retest correlations, usually hovering around
.40, and not exceeding .60 when the same question is asked twice
during the same 1-hr interview (Andrews & Whithey, 1976;
Glatzer, 1984)” (p. 62, italics added).
However, neither Andrew and Withey’s (1976) nor Glatzer’s
(1984) book support this conclusion. Andrews and Withey reported, “The reliabilities of the Life measures in the national
surveys are as follows: May data, .61, November Form 2 data, .71,
and April data, .68” (p. 192). In a footnote the authors added that,
“The observed reliability of Life 1 and Life 2 in the July data are
.64” (p. 192). Glatzer reported, “The question about how satisfied
somebody was with his life was asked at the beginning and the end
of a 1-hr interview. For the association between the two measures
a correlation of r ⫽ .60 was found” (p. 187, authors’ translation
from the original German text).1
To determine the average retest stability of life satisfaction
judgments, we conducted a meta-analysis of studies that reported
retest correlations of life satisfaction judgments. Our meta-analysis
followed Roberts and DelVeccio’s (2000) study of the stability of
personality traits. We used several search strategies to retrieve
relevant studies; in particular, we examined all articles in specialized subjective well-being journals (e.g., Social Indicators Research, Journal of Happiness Studies), and we searched PsycINFO
with the keywords life satisfaction and panel, wave, retest, or
longitudinal. Additional studies were found by checking the reference lists of retrieved articles for additional studies.
Although studies with a relatively short time interval are most
pertinent to examine the influence of temporarily accessible infor-

mation, we also included studies with a much longer retest interval
in the meta-analysis to examine the influence of time on the
stability of life satisfaction judgments. We also included studies
with single-item indicators and those with more reliable scales as
measures of life satisfaction, although studies with single-item
indicators produce an inflated estimate of situation-specific variance because it is impossible to separate random measurement
variance from systematic, situation-specific variance. Some studies reported more than one retest correlation. For multiple retest
correlations of the same time interval in the same sample (e.g.,
1980 –1982, 1982–1984), we computed the average retest correlation to ensure independence of the data. However, we did not
average retest correlations of different time intervals to allow
examining the influence of time on retest stability.
The meta-analysis is based on 83 coefficients from 38 independent samples. Retest correlations ranged from r ⫽ .24 to r ⫽ .87.
Figure 1 displays all coefficients as a function of the retest interval
(x-axis) and the use of single-item versus multiple-item measures.
A visual inspection shows that retest correlations decreased as a
log function of the time interval. A similar function has been found
for other self-related ratings such as self-esteem (Conley, 1984).
Figure 1 also shows a clear effect of random measurement error in
that multiple-item scales produced stronger retest correlations than
single-item measures, especially over short time intervals. This
seeming interaction effect is due to the nonlinear effect of reliability on strong versus weak correlations. For example, a true correlation of .80 is attenuated by a reliability of .60 to an observed
correlation of .48, an absolute difference of .32. A true correlation
of .30 is attenuated by the same reliability of .60 to an observed
correlation of .18, a much smaller absolute difference.
To estimate the contribution of retest interval and type of
measure to the variability in retest correlations, we regressed retest
correlations onto a log function of time interval and a dichotomous
variable distinguishing single-item and multiple-item measures.
Interval (␤ ⫽ ⫺.74) and measure (␤ ⫽ .31) were both significant
predictors and explained most of the variance in retest stability
(R2 ⫽ .79). The simple correlation between log interval and retest
stability for multiple-item measures was r ⫽ ⫺.89 (N ⫽ 46).
The regression equation predicts a retest–stability of r ⫽ .86 for
a retest–interval of 0. This prediction is consistent with the average
retest stability in all studies with multiple-item scales and a retest
interval of 1 month or less (r ⫽ .79, N ⫽ 7). This estimate
approaches the internal consistency of multiple-item life satisfaction scales, which are in the .80 to .90 range (e.g., Pavot & Diener,
1

To avoid any impression of bias, we would like to point out that
Glatzer (1984) considered a retest correlation of r ⫽ .60, “a value that is
rather low considering that the same content was assessed” (p. 187). We
disagree with this conclusion. First a retest correlation of r ⫽ .60 implies
that 60% of the variance in each assessment reflects reliable individual
differences in life satisfaction. Second, the conclusion ignores that some of
the remaining 40% of variance is due to random measurement error rather
than systematic changes that are due to temporarily accessible information.
Even the typical interitem correlation between two life satisfaction items in
a multiple-item questionnaire is only .48, ranging from .30 to .68 (N ⫽ 818;
Schimmack, 2004). To separate the influence of random measurement
error and systematic effects of assessment situations it is necessary to
assess life satisfaction with a multiple-item scale (e.g., Eid & Diener,
2004).

LIFE SATISFACTION JUDGMENTS

397

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

In summary, both sides of the debate agree with the logical
argument that strong effects of temporarily accessible information
should produce low retest correlations. A systematic review of the
evidence revealed high retest correlations over short retest intervals. Using the modus tollens of logical reasoning (If P causes Q,
and Q is not observed, then P is false), the empirical evidence
suggests that temporarily accessible information has a weak effect
on life satisfaction judgments. This conclusion seems to contradict
Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) conclusion that experimental manipulations of temporarily accessible information have profound effects. To reconcile this apparent inconsistency, we reviewed studies that manipulated the item order of domain satisfaction and life
satisfaction judgments.

Item-Order Effects: A Quantitative Review

Figure 1. Plot of retest correlations as a function of retest interval and
type of measure (black circles: single item; light gray squares: multiple
items).

1993b; Schimmack, Diener, et al., 2002). On the basis of this
information, it is possible to estimate the contribution of temporarily accessible and chronically accessible information to life
satisfaction judgments. About 80% of the variance is due to
chronically accessible variance, 10% is due to temporarily accessible information, and 10% is due to random measurement error.
These estimates are consistent with Eid and Diener’s (2004) latentstate, latent-trait analysis, which yielded 74%, 16%, and 10%,
respectively.
It is noteworthy that the general conclusion allows for occasional findings of stronger effects of temporarily accessible information. The strongest deviation from our general findings (standardized residual ⫽ 2.83) was Yardley and Rice’s (1991) retest
correlation of .50 over a 2-month retest interval with a multipleitem scale. The authors also reported that respondents’ moods at
Time 2 predicted changes in life satisfaction. Thus, occasionally
retest stability is lowered by reliance on temporarily accessible
information, but this finding is the exception, not the norm.
We acknowledge that retest correlations provide only indirect
information about the effect sizes of temporarily accessible information. It is possible that our meta-analysis underestimates the
effect of temporarily accessible information because researchers
used identical questionnaires for both assessments. As a result, the
same information may have been made temporarily accessible on
both occasions. However, several findings render this explanation
unlikely. First, some studies assessed life satisfaction at the beginning of a questionnaire to avoid priming effects and obtained retest
correlations of the same magnitude as other studies (Schimmack,
Diener, et al., 2002). Second, some life domains are consistently
stronger predictors than others across diverse studies that probably
presented items in different orders (Heller, Watson, & Hies, 2004).
Third, numerous studies have reported similar correlations between life satisfaction and personality across different item orders
(Pavot & Diener, 1993a; Schimmack, Oishi, Furr, & Funder, 2004;
Schimmack, Radhakrishnan, Oishi, Dzokoto, & Ahadi, 2002).

Several situational factors can account for situation-specific
variance in life satisfaction. The most frequently examined type of
context effect is the influence of information that was made
temporarily accessible by a preceding question. Schwarz and
Strack (1999) proposed that this effect is the most problematic one
for the validity of life satisfaction judgments. “Information that has
just been used—for example, to answer a preceding question in a
questionnaire—is particularly likely to come to mind later on,
although only for a limited time. This temporarily accessible
information is the basis of most context effects in survey measurement” (p. 63). Given the practical importance of item-order effects,
we limited our review to studies that experimentally manipulated
the order of domain satisfaction and life satisfaction items.
To our knowledge, Schuman and Presser (1981) conducted the
first study of item-order effects on life satisfaction judgments.
They manipulated the order of a general happiness question and
happiness with marriage in a typical survey study. This seminal
study failed to show any evidence that domain satisfaction was a
stronger predictor of life satisfaction if a domain was made temporarily accessible. “The two happiness items are themselves
intercorrelated to the same degree on the two forms” (Schuman &
Presser, 1981, p. 43, italics added). A subsequent study by Turner
(1984) also reported trivial item-order effects when happiness was
assessed before or after two questions about financial satisfaction
(specific– global rs .47 and .34; global–specific rs ⫽ .40 and .28).
To determine the average effect size of temporarily accessible
information and to examine potential sources of variation in effect
sizes, we conducted a meta-analysis. We searched for relevant
articles by using the cited reference search in the Web of Science
online database. We started with published articles on item-order
effects that we knew (e.g., Strack, Martin, & Schwarz, 1988) and
searched for articles that cited them. After finding a relevant
article, we repeated this produce until no new articles could be
found. Our criterion for inclusion in the meta-analysis was that the
study manipulated accessibility by changing the order of specific
and global items and the global item assessed respondents’ own
global life satisfaction or happiness. We excluded Turner’s (1984)
study from the meta-analysis because the article failed to report
sample size, which made it impossible to estimate a weighted
average effect size. We consider this approach conservative, given
the effect size in this study (d ⫽ .15, r ⫽ .07).
We found eight relevant articles that reported 16 item-order
comparisons (see Table 1). Meta-analyses of the difference be-

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

398

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Table 1
Item-Order Effects on the Correlations Between Domain Satisfaction and Life Satisfaction
Data set

Domain

Global–specific

N

Specific–global

N

z

Effect size d

Effect size r

Strack et al. (1988), Study 2
Strack et al. (1988), Study 1
Schwarz et al. (1991), 1 domain
Haberstroh et al. (2002), Germany
Rudman et al. (1995), delaya
Pavot & Diener (1993a), 1-item global
Pavot & Diener (1993a), 1-item global
Schwarz et al. (1991), 3 domains
Schuman & Presser (1981)
Smith (1982)
Pavot & Diener (1993), 5-item global
Tourangeau et al. (1991; GSS)b
Rudman et al. (1995), immediate
Pavot & Diener (1993), 5-item global
Haberstroh et al. (2002), China
Tourangeau et al. (1991; Table 1)
Weighted average

Dating
Dating
Marital
Academic
Transplant
Dating
Financial
Marital
Marital
Marital
Financial
Marital
Transplant
Dating
Academic
Marital
Combined

⫺.12
.16
.32a
.53
.25
.15b
.07b
.32a
.49
.39
.28c
.41
.28
.33c
.50
.55
.32

60
60
50
28
50
128
128
50
201
268
122
265
50
122
54
60
1,696

.66
.55
.67
.78
.49
.35b
.27b
.46
.53
.42
.25c
.37
.21
.20c
.36
.28
.40

60
60
50
30
50
117
117
50
172
613
104
519
50
122
55
53
2,222

5.04*
2.44*
2.32*
1.64
1.36
1.65
1.60
0.80
0.56
0.44
⫺0.16
0.56
⫺0.36
⫺1.08
⫺0.87
⫺1.69
2.85*

1.83
0.91
0.96
0.91
0.56
0.43
0.41
0.33
0.11
0.07
⫺0.06
⫺0.09
⫺0.15
⫺0.28
⫺0.34
⫺0.66
0.18

.67
.43
.42
.41
.27
.21
.20
.16
.05
.04
⫺.03
⫺.05
⫺.07
⫺.14
⫺.17
⫺.31
.09

Note. Coefficients that share a letter are based on the same sample.
a
Delay ⫽ items were separated by 10 demographic questions.
* p ⬍ .05.

tween correlations are fairly uncommon. We used two approaches
that yielded convergent results. First, we computed the weighted
average correlation for global–specific and specific– global conditions across all item-order comparisons (see Table 1). We used
Meta5.3 software (Schwarzer, 1995) for this purpose. Then, we
tested whether the two correlations were statistically significant
from each other. In support of Schwarz and Strack (1999), the
specific– global correlation was significantly larger than the
global–specific correlation (see Table 1). To determine the effect
size of temporarily accessible information, we used Fisher’s r-to-z
transformation and computed the difference between the two z
scores (Snedecor & Cochran, 1980). This difference score (d)
corresponds to Cohen’s d, which can be retransformed into r as an
alternative effect size measure (Schwarzer, 1995). On the basis of
conventional norms for the interpretation of effect sizes (Cohen,
1988), the effect size was in the small to moderate range (ds
ranging from .10 to .40). The second approach computed effect
sizes (d) for each item-order comparison, and the 16 effect sizes
were subjected to a meta-analysis using Meta5.3. The metaanalysis revealed large variability in effect sizes across studies,
homogeneity Q(15) ⫽ 159, p ⬍ .01, and sampling error explained
only 8% of the variance in effect sizes. Because of the large
heterogeneity, we relied on the random effect model to test significance and estimate the population effect size. This analysis also
confirmed a statistically significant effect of item order (z ⫽ 1.89,
p ⫽ .02, one-tailed) and an effect size in the small to moderate
range (d ⫽ .29, r ⫽ .15). We also computed the effect size without
two conditions (i.e., Schwarz, Strack, & Mai [1991] three-item
context; Haberstroh, Oyserman, Schwarz, Kühnen, & Ji [2002]
Chinese participants) that were expected to produce weaker effects
by the original authors. The estimated effect size was similar due
to the small samples in these conditions (d ⫽ .34, r ⫽ .17).
In summary, our meta-analysis indicated that item-order effects
on global life satisfaction judgments are statistically significant,
supporting the claim of Schwarz and Strack (1999), but that the

average effect size was in the weak to moderate range. The results
of our meta-analysis are inconclusive for two reasons. First, the
absolute number of studies that have examined item-order effects
is surprisingly small, given their theoretical importance. Second,
the results are extremely heterogeneous with effect sizes ranging
from d ⫽ 1.83 to ⫺0.66. This finding suggests that temporarily
accessible information may have strong effect in some situations
but no effects under other situations. A better understanding of the
conditions that moderate the influence of temporarily accessible
information would help researchers to minimize these undesirable
effects. We conducted several new studies to examine potential
moderators.

New Empirical Evidence
Study 1: Replicating Strack et al. (1988)
To examine conditions that produce strong effects of temporarily accessible information, we first focused on Strack et al.’s
(1988) study that produced the strongest item-order effects in our
meta-analysis. In the original study, the two questions about dating
and life in general were administered after several questions about
satisfaction with the library and other aspects of student life. Strack
et al. (1988) reasoned that in this context, “Student issues were
activated by the cover story and the preceding questions, and it is
likely that these contents entered into the general happiness rating
when the dating question was not asked” (p. 435). Strack et al.’s
(1988) explanation provides a plausible explanation for the strong
item-order effects in this particular study. The context of a student
survey and the questions about student issues suggested to students
that they should use student issues, but not other aspects of their
lives such as dating, to answer the general happiness question. As
a result, they excluded dating when judging general happiness,
leading to a zero correlation. In contrast, the question about dating
in the specific– global condition suggested to students that the

LIFE SATISFACTION JUDGMENTS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

subsequent general happiness item is a broader item that also
includes other nonacademic issues such as dating. As a result, they
included dating satisfaction in their response and a strong correlation emerged.
In short, the cover story and the placement of the dating question
seemed to have changed the very meaning of the general happiness
question. Thus, we predicted that strong item-order effects occur
only when the survey context alters the interpretation of the
general life satisfaction item. This interpretation is also consistent
with Strack et al.’s (1988) other important findings that responses
to life satisfaction judgments are influenced by conversational
norms that change the meaning of life satisfaction items.

Method
Participants. Two hundred twenty-five students (179 women, 46 men)
at the University of Toronto, Mississauga (UTM) participated in this study
for course credit. The students were randomly assigned to one of three
conditions with 75 students in each condition.
Materials and procedure. We tried to replicate the original study as
closely as possible. We contacted Fritz Strack (personal communication) to
obtain more information about the questions used in the original study.
Understandably, concrete information about the materials was no longer
available more than 10 years after the study was completed. However, the
lead investigator recalled that the other questions in the student survey
were about innocuous student issues such as parking. In this spirit, we
developed our own materials. We wrote 14 questions about happiness with
student issues (e.g., parking, library services, food services, professors,
lectures). We also included a global question and a question about dating.
Following the original study, all items started with the stem, “I am happy
with,” followed by a particular domain (e.g., “I am happy with the classrooms.”). The response format was the same 11-point scale used in the
original study. The extremes of the scales were labeled 1 (not so happy)
and 11 (extremely happy).
All questions were printed on a questionnaire titled “Questionnaire on
Student Issues.” The questionnaire started with some general information;
for example, “This questionnaire is part of a survey research project of
students at UTM. We are interested in how happy students are with their
lives at UTM.” After this brief introduction, the first 12 items followed on
the first page. The next 4 items followed on a second page. Two pages were
used to follow Strack et al.’s (1988) procedure of “placing the dating
question at the end of the first page of the questionnaire and the general
happiness question at the beginning of the second page” (p. 434) or vice
versa in the global–specific condition. To examine whether questions about
student issues influenced answers to the global question, we created a third
condition. In this condition, the global question was the first item on the
first page before students answered questions about student issues. To
summarize, there were three item orders: (a) Item 12 global and Item 13
dating, (b) Item 12 dating and Item 13 global, and (c) Item 1 global and
Item 13 dating. On the basis of Strack et al.’s (1988) reasoning, the third
condition should produce a moderate correlation between dating and global
happiness that falls between the correlations for the other two conditions.

399

Table 2
Correlations Between Dating and Global Happiness (N ⫽ 225)
Condition

r

z

Effect size d

Effect size r

Specific 13–global 12
Global 12–specific 13
Global 1–specific 13
Global–specific combined

.49*
.40*
.38*
.39*

0.67
0.82
0.86

0.22
0.27
0.25

.11
.13
.12

Note. Comparisons are with the specific 13– global 12 condition.

two global–specific conditions were virtually identical (z ⫽ 0.14,
p ⬎ .50). The specific– global correlation did not differ significantly from the global–specific correlation, although the difference
was in the expected direction. The effect size was comparable with
the effect size of our meta-analysis (d ⫽ .22, r ⫽ 11).
In summary, Study 1 did not replicate the strong item-order
effects of the original study, despite our attempt to follow the
original procedure as closely as possible. The discrepancy was
largely due to different correlations in the global–specific condition. Whereas the dating–life satisfaction correlations were close to
zero in the original study, it was r ⫽ .40 in our study. Apparently,
our participants were not influenced by the cover story. Given the
lack of specific information about the original cover story, it is
possible that our cover story was not as strong as the one in the
original study. Another explanation is that the zero correlations in
the original study provide an unreliable estimate of the true global–
specific correlation between dating and global happiness. The
practical implication of this study is that it is quite difficult to alter
the meaning of a global life satisfaction question, which explains
why most studies find high retest stability and weak effects of
temporarily accessible information.

Study 2: Priming Important Domains
In Study 2 we shifted the focus from the effects of temporarily
accessible information to the effects of chronically accessible
information. It is plausible that the weak item-order effects observed in many studies are due to the fact that most respondents
rely on chronically accessible information about important life
domains. This prediction directly follows from Schwarz and
Strack’s (1999) observation that item-order effects are to be expected only “when answering a preceding question increases the
temporary accessibility of information that is not chronically accessible anyway” (p. 63). In other words, item-order effects should
be relatively small when preceding items activate information
about important life domains that are also chronically accessible
(Tourangeau, Rasinski, & Bradburn, 1991).

Method
Results and Discussion
We first examined whether item order influenced the mean
rating of dating and global happiness. The data were analyzed in
separate analyses of variance (ANOVAs) with the three item
orders as a between-subjects variable. No significant effects were
found (Fs ⬍ 0.50, ps ⬎ .50, ␩2 ⬍ .01). The main analyses
examined the correlations between dating and global happiness in
each of the three conditions (see Table 2). The correlations for the

Participants. One hundred UTM students participated in this study for
course credit.
Materials. The global life satisfaction items were the first three items
of Diener, Emmons, Larsen, and Griffin’s (1985) Satisfaction With Life
Scale (SWLS): (a) “In most ways my life is close to my ideal,” (b) “The
conditions of my life are excellent,” and (c) “I am satisfied with my life.”
We chose the first three items because they form a reliable scale and are
better indicators of life satisfaction than the two items that were not used
(Oishi, 2004). For the domain questions, participants were told that the

400

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

experimenters were “interested in the most important aspects of your life.”
To explain what we meant by aspects, we explained that aspects could be
“anything that is important to you such as social relationships, achievements, conditions of your life, or the performance of your favorite sports
team.” We reemphasized that it was up to the participants to “determine
what is most central to your life!” Afterward participants had five lines to
list the five most important aspects of their lives that came to mind. After
the listing task, participants rated how satisfied they were with each of the
listed aspects (e.g., “I am satisfied with Aspect 1”). All ratings were made
on a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree).
The global life satisfaction judgments and the important domain questions
were printed on two separate pages. The order of the two pages was varied
so that half the participants received the global questions first and the other
half received the important domain questions first.

Results and Discussion
We examined mean differences with an ANOVA, with item
order as the between-subjects variable and type of measure as the
within-subject variable. The ANOVA revealed a main effect of
measure, F(1, 98) ⫽ 5.02, p ⬍ .01, but no significant effects of
item order or interaction, F(1, 98) ⬍ 1, p ⬎ .10. Life satisfaction
was slightly higher on the averaged ratings of important domains
(M ⫽ 5.07) than on the SWLS items (M ⫽ 4.87).
The main analysis examined the correlation between the two
measures. The global–specific correlation was high (r ⫽ .70),
indicating that both measures capture satisfaction with important
life domains. The specific– global correlation was stronger (r ⫽
.79, z ⫽ 0.99, p ⫽ .32; d ⫽ .40, r ⫽ .20). This finding indicates
that not all of the relevant information about important life satisfaction was chronically accessible. Although the effect size for
temporarily accessible information in this study was larger than the
average effect size in the meta-analysis, the global–specific correlation was also much larger. Both effect sizes were larger because the correlation is based on satisfaction with five domains
rather than a single domain. In comparison, the effect size of
chronically accessible information is considerably larger than the
incremental effect due to rendering this information temporarily
accessible.
One potential problem with our study was the reliance on
self-generated life domains. As suggested by a reviewer, it is
possible that participants failed to follow our instructions to list
relevant life domains and rather listed any information that was
temporarily accessible. If this were the case, the high correlation
between domain satisfaction and global satisfaction would reflect
effects of temporarily accessible information. To address this
concern, we coded participants’ written descriptions of the important life domains. Two research assistants independently classified
the information into domains that are listed as important by students, namely family relationships, friendships, romantic relationships, academic life, and recreation (e.g., Schimmack, Diener, et
al., 2002). Information that did not fit these domains was assigned
to a “rest” category. Interrater agreement was acceptable (␬ ⫽ .80).
The following analyses are based on the cases for which both
raters agreed (83%). Academic life was listed most frequently
(27%), followed by family (20%), friends (18%), recreation (9%),
and romantic relationship (8%). The remaining 16% consisted of
other aspects of life such as health, religion, or freedom. Chisquare tests revealed no significant effects of item order on the
type of domains that were listed, ␹2(4, N ⫽ 48 – 83) ⬍ 6, ps ⬎ .10.

The fact that 84% of the unambiguously classified descriptions
(70% of the total) were related to important concerns in students’
lives indicates that the high correlations between domain ratings
and global ratings are largely due to chronically accessible information about important life domains. In summary, Study 2 provides
empirical support for the hypothesis that item-order effects are small
when preceding items activate information that is already chronically
accessible (Schwarz & Strack, 1999; Tourangeau et al., 1991).

Study 3: Controlling for Shared Method Variance
Study 2 suggested that global life satisfaction judgments are
strongly influenced by chronically accessible information about
important life domains. However, the strong correlation between
life satisfaction and satisfaction with important life domains may
have been inflated by response styles. Although these biases are
typically not very strong (Rorer, 1965; Schimmack, Bockenholt, &
Reisenzein, 2002), in Study 3 we attempted to control for these
effects.
Response styles are by definition content free (see Rorer, 1965).
Thus, they should inflate all correlations with all variables that
share a common response format. For example, a common response style would inflate the correlation between life satisfaction
and an important domain (e.g., family satisfaction) to the same
degree as the correlation between life satisfaction and an unimportant domain (e.g., weather; see Schimmack, Diener, et al.,
2002, for information on the importance of domains). In contrast,
reliance on chronically accessible information should produce
stronger correlations of life satisfaction with important domains
than correlations with unimportant domains. In Study 3 we examined the contribution of response styles to the correlation between
domain satisfaction and life satisfaction by varying the importance
of life domains. In Study 3 we also used a larger sample for a more
powerful test of item order effects.

Method
Participants. Two hundred students at UTM (149 women, 51 men)
participated in this study for course credit.
Materials. Global life satisfaction was assessed with the same items
that were used in Study 2. Domain satisfaction was assessed with a 30-item
questionnaire. The questionnaire included 3 items for 10 domains. Eight
domains were chosen because they were rated as important (⬎ 2.5 on a
scale from 0 ⫽ not at all important to 4 ⫽ extremely important) domains
of life satisfaction by respondents from the same population (Schimmack,
2004). The domains in decreasing order of importance were goal progress,
academic performance, health, friendships, relationship with parents, housing, romantic life, and recreation. Two domains were chosen because they
are relatively unimportant domains (⬍ 2 on the same 0 – 4 scale): traffic
and weather. The three items for each domain were worded analogically to
the global items. For example, the 3 weather items were (a) “I am satisfied
with the weather,” (b) “The weather is close to ideal,” and (c) “The weather
is excellent.” The same wording was used for all 10 domains. The items
were presented in a random order. All ratings were made on a 7-point scale
ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). Global and
domain items were printed on separate pages and the order of the two pages
was manipulated so that half the participants answered global items before
domain items and the other half completed questions in the reverse order.

Results and Discussion
We first examined mean differences between item orders. We
created scales for satisfaction with the 10 domains and global

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LIFE SATISFACTION JUDGMENTS

satisfaction by averaging the three items related to each construct.
We submitted the averages to a multivariate ANOVA, with item
order as the between-subjects variable. The analysis revealed a
significant effect (Wilks’s ␭ ⫽ .90, p ⬍ .05). Follow-up ANOVAs
revealed only one significant effect for the global scale, F(1,
198) ⫽ 6.66, p ⬍ .05, d ⫽ .36, r ⫽ .18. Global satisfaction was
higher in the specific– global order (M ⫽ 5.26) than in the global–
specific order (M ⫽ 4.82).
We first examined the simple correlations between average
domain satisfaction and life satisfaction for different item orders.
These correlations were r ⫽ .71 for the global–specific order and
r ⫽ .78 for the specific– global order. The difference between these
correlations was not significant (z ⫽ 1.10, p ⫽ .27). As in the
previous studies, the effect size was small to moderate (d ⫽ .32,
r ⫽ .16).
Next, we conducted more sophisticated analyses by means of
multigroup structural equation modeling. The first model used the
three items for each construct as observed variables that loaded on
a factor. The 10 domain factors and the global satisfaction factor
were allowed to correlate freely with each other and no constraints
between groups were imposed. The fit of this model was acceptable (Browne & Cudeck, 1993; Hu & Bentler, 1998), ␹2(880, N ⫽
200) ⫽ 1,598, Akaike’s information criterion (AIC) ⫽ ⫺162; root
mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) ⫽ .065. The next
model imposed constraints between groups on all parameters except the correlations between domain factors with the global
factor. Model fit remained acceptable, ␹2(991, N ⫽ 200) ⫽ 1,822,
AIC ⫽ ⫺160, RMSEA ⫽ .065. The next model tested item-order
effects by constraining the correlations between domain factors
and the global factor. Model fit remained acceptable, ␹2(1001, N ⫽
200) ⫽ 1,840, AIC ⫽ ⫺162, RMSEA ⫽ .065. More important, the
fit of the more constrained model was not significantly worse than
the fit of the previous model, ␹2(10, N ⫽ 200) ⫽ 18, p ⫽ .06,
indicating that the domain– global correlations did not differ between two item-order conditions. We also used a less conservative
approach to test for the presence of item-order effects. For this
purpose, we individually constrained only 1 domain and ran 10
independent models. This approach revealed a significant decrease
in model fit for two domains: housing, ␹2(1, N ⫽ 200) ⫽ 6, p ⫽
.01, and friendships, ␹2(5, N ⫽ 200), p ⫽ .03. Effect size analyses
revealed that friendship and housing were the only domains with
moderate to large effect sizes (see Table 3).

401

To estimate the determination of global satisfaction by domain
satisfaction, we also tested a model with directed paths from
domain factors to the global factor. The multiple correlations were
high in all models (.80). To demonstrate the effect of importance,
we compared a model that predicted life satisfaction from two
unimportant domains (weather, traffic) with a model that predicted
life satisfaction from two important domains (academic, family).
The former model explained 13% of the variance in life satisfaction, whereas the latter model explained 46% of the variance in life
satisfaction. Thus, the high correlation between domain satisfaction and life satisfaction cannot be attributed to response styles.
One concern regarding our findings could be that the domains
differed in other characteristics than importance and that these
other characteristics may account for the difference in the strength
of correlations with global life satisfaction. One possibility is that
satisfaction with weather or traffic is more homogeneous than
satisfaction with other domains, which would lead to less variability and attenuate correlations. However, an inspection of the standard deviations of domain satisfaction provided no support for this
hypothesis. Indeed, satisfaction with weather (SD ⫽ 1.51) and
traffic (SD ⫽ 1.72) was more variable than satisfaction with other
domains such as academic life (SD ⫽ 1.16), family (SD ⫽ 1.50),
friendships (SD ⫽ 1.38), or recreation (SD ⫽ 1.36). The high
variability for traffic was due to the fact that most students at UTM
live off campus, and commutes to campus can range from 10 min
to more than an hour. In addition, low variability in satisfaction
with weather would also indicate that response styles have a small
effect on these ratings because response styles should produce
variability in ratings even if all students were equally satisfied with
the weather.
In summary, Study 3 provides additional evidence that satisfaction with important life domains predicts life satisfaction even
when this information is not made temporarily accessible by
preceding items. Although response styles accounted for some of
the shared variance between domain satisfaction and life satisfaction, most of the variance was due to actual satisfaction with
important life domains. In comparison, temporarily accessible
effects tended to be small for most domains. These findings
provide additional support for Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) hypothesis that priming chronically accessible information produces
weak item-order effects.

Table 3
Parameters of the Correlations Between Domain Factors and the Global Life Satisfaction Factor
(N ⫽ 200)
Domain

Constrained

Global–specific

Specific–global

Effect size d

Effect size r

Goal progress
Friendship
Academic
Housing
Recreation
Parents
Romantic life
Traffic
Weather

.62
.62a
.60
.60a
.53
.52
.33
.28
.25

.65
.53
.62
.48
.52
.53
.38
.22
.23

.57
.70
.59
.67
.51
.56
.24
.36
.29

⫺0.26
0.55
⫺0.09
0.58
⫺0.03
0.09
⫺0.31
0.31
0.13

⫺0.13
0.27
⫺0.04
0.28
⫺0.02
0.04
⫺0.15
0.15
0.06

a

The constrained model produced significant reduction in fit.

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

402

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 4: Effect of Chronic Accessibility and Relevance on
Item-Order Effects
In Studies 2 and 3 we demonstrated that priming satisfaction
with important life domains leads to relatively weak item-order
effects because this information is already temporarily accessible.
In addition, in Study 3 we demonstrated that irrelevant domains
produced no item-order effects because participants did not rely on
this information even when it was made temporarily accessible.
The latter finding is also consistent with Schwarz and Strack’s
(1999) judgment model of life satisfaction. Accordingly, temporarily accessible information is not automatically incorporated in a
life satisfaction judgment. Rather, both chronically accessible information and temporarily accessible information have to pass a
relevance check. If respondents do not consider accessible information relevant, it will have no influence on the global life
satisfaction judgment. What has been overlooked, however, is that
relevance is highly correlated with the distinction between temporarily accessible and chronically accessible information. Any information can be made temporarily accessible (e.g., “Did you ever
visit France?”, “Do you like soccer?”). However, most of the
information that is made accessible in this way is irrelevant to life
satisfaction and will not be used to form life satisfaction judgments. Thus, preceding questions about irrelevant information will
not produce item-order effects because this information is excluded from global life satisfaction judgments. On the other hand,
the previous studies demonstrated that relevant information was
already chronically accessible (see also Schimmack, Diener, et al.,
2002).
As a result, Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) judgment model of life
satisfaction predicts strong item-order effects only for information
that is relevant, but not chronically accessible. The previous study
suggested that housing satisfaction may be a domain that fulfills
these criteria. Schimmack, Diener, et al. (2002) also found that
housing satisfaction was only moderately chronically accessible
and moderately relevant. Thus, in Study 4 we examined whether
housing satisfaction produces reliably stronger item-order effects
than either an irrelevant domain that is not chronically accessible
(weather) or a relevant domain that is highly chronically accessible
(family).

Method
Participants. Two hundred twenty UTM students (178 women, 42
men) participated in this study for course credit.
Materials and procedure. Global life satisfaction was assessed with
the SWLS (Diener et al., 1985). The scale comprises five items: (a) “In
most ways my life is close to ideal,” (b) “The conditions of my life are
excellent,” (c) “I am satisfied with my life,” (d) “So far I have gotten the
important things I want in my life,” and (e) “If I could live my life over,
I would change almost nothing.”

We selected our domains on the basis of Schimmack, Diener, et al.’s
(2002) findings regarding chronic accessibility and importance. Satisfaction with weather (i.e., “I am satisfied with the weather”) was used as an
item that activates irrelevant information that is not chronically accessible.
We selected satisfaction with housing as an item that activates information
that is moderately relevant and chronically accessible, and satisfaction with
family relationships as a highly relevant and chronically accessible domain.
Each item was presented with a 7-point scale ranging from 1 (strongly
disagree) to 7 (strongly agree). One hundred thirty-four students received
questionnaires that started with the domain satisfaction questions on one
page followed by the SWLS items on the next page. Eighty-six students
received the same questions in reverse order, again printed on two separate
pages.

Results and Discussion
As usual, the SWLS revealed good reliability, independent of
the item order (domain first, ␣ ⫽ .84; SWLS first, ␣ ⫽ .80). Item
order had no effect on the mean level of life satisfaction (domain
first, M ⫽ 23.50, SD ⫽ 6.04; SWLS first, M ⫽ 22.77, SD ⫽ 5.74),
t(218) ⫽ 0.89, p ⫽ .37. Table 4 shows the correlations between
domain satisfaction and global life satisfaction (SWLS) for the two
groups. As predicted, weather satisfaction was not significantly
correlated to life satisfaction in either group, and item order had no
effect on these correlations. As expected, family satisfaction was
significantly correlated with life satisfaction in both groups, and
there was no significant effect of item order. Contrary to our
prediction, housing satisfaction failed to produce an item-order
effect.
Study 4 confirmed the prediction that priming an unimportant
domain that is not chronically accessible produces no item-order
effects because people do not incorporate irrelevant information
even when it is made temporarily accessible. It also confirmed
Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) prediction that item order has no
effect for highly relevant and chronically accessible domains because this information is already used even when it is not made
temporarily accessible. Study 4 did not confirm our prediction that
a moderately relevant and accessible domain would produce significant item-order effects, even though the same domain produced
a significant effect in Study 3. This finding is consistent with the
general observation in survey research that it is difficult to predict
item-order effects a priori (Schuman & Presser, 1981; Tourangeau
et al., 1991).
Housing satisfaction may have failed to produce reliable itemorder effects because it was not really a moderately relevant and
accessible domain. In fact, Schimmack, Diener, et al. (2002) found
that housing was highly relevant for some students and irrelevant
for other students. For the former students housing was chronically
accessible. For the latter students it was not. Housing satisfaction
predicted life satisfaction when it was relevant and chronically
accessible but not when it was irrelevant and not chronically

Table 4
Domain Global Correlations in Study 4 (N ⫽ 220)
Domain

Global–specific

Specific–global

z

Effect size d

Effect size r

Weather
Family
Housing

.15
.46
.49

.03
.49
.41

⫺0.86
0.27
⫺0.71

⫺0.24
0.07
⫺0.20

⫺0.12
0.03
⫺0.10

LIFE SATISFACTION JUDGMENTS

accessible. Given the high correlation between relevance and
chronic accessibility, it may be extremely difficult to find a domain
that is relevant and not chronically accessible. This may explain
why item order typically does not produce strong effects.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Study 5: Monthly Satisfaction
We designed Study 5 to test another hypothesis about conditions
that may produce stronger item-order effects. Pavot and Diener
(1993a) obtained stronger item-order effects with single-item measures of global life satisfaction than with a five-item scale. Thus,
it is possible that our use of multiple-item measures of life satisfaction may have attenuated item-order effects. However, our new
findings with multiple-item measures of life satisfaction (Studies 2
to 4) produced similar results to most studies with single-item
indicators in our meta-analysis and our Study 1. Thus, we predicted that item order has a weak effect even when we assess life
satisfaction with a single item.
Another factor that may influence the strength of item-order
effects is the availability of chronically accessible information.
Lavine, Huff, Wagner, and Sweeney (1998) found that attitude
strength moderated priming effects on attitude judgments. Participants with strong attitudes (e.g., about welfare spending) were less
susceptible to the presentation of the question in a liberal or
conservative context. It is plausible to assume that people’s life
satisfaction is similar to a strong attitude. People frequently think
about a strong attitude, which makes relevant information chronically accessible. Robinson and Clore (2002) proposed that judgments that are limited to a recent time period are less likely to be
answered on the basis of semantic information and more likely to
retrieve episodic information. If judgments of a recent time period
have to be computed at the time of the judgment on the basis of
episodic information, the judgments may be more susceptible to
the influence of temporarily accessible information. Thus, in Study
5 we examined item-order effects on a single item about global life
satisfaction in the past month. As in Study 4, the relevance of the
temporarily accessible information was manipulated.

Method
Participants. Six hundred fifty-one students at UTM participated in
this study.
Materials and procedure. All participants were tested in groups of 1 to
4 students. Participants first completed experiments on emotion and attention (e.g., responding to emotional pictures or pictures of facial expressions), which did not prime self-related cognitions. Afterward, they were
handed a questionnaire “to assess their life and personality.” The questionnaire started with a satisfaction survey. Participants were asked to consider

403

their satisfaction in the past month (30 days). The complete questionnaire
included 33 items (3 global, 3 items for 10 specific domains). To examine
item-order effects, five versions of the questionnaire were constructed. One
version started with a question about the weather (“The weather was close
to ideal”). A second version started with a question about satisfaction with
housing (“My housing situation was close to ideal”). A third version started
with a question about satisfaction with parents (“My relationship with my
parents was close to ideal”). A fourth version started with satisfaction about
health (“My health was close to ideal”). For all of these versions, the
second item asked about general life-satisfaction (“My life in general was
excellent”). The fifth version started with the general life satisfaction item.
The domain items for weather, housing, parents, and health followed at
random positions in the rest of the survey. The response format was a
7-point (from strongly disagree to strongly agree) scale.

Results and Discussion
To examine the presence of item-order effects, we compared the
correlations of the specific– global conditions with the corresponding correlation in the global–specific condition (see Table 5).
Three domains showed very small effects of item order. In contrast, satisfaction with relationship with parents produced a significant item-order effect. However, the effect was in the opposite
direction predicted by an influence of temporarily accessible information. That is, the parent– global satisfaction correlation was
larger when the question about parents was asked after rather than
before the global question. The design of Study 5 also allowed us
to estimate the reliability of global life satisfaction judgments that
followed different specific items within the same survey. The
correlations between the first and the last global item for the five
versions were .77, .68, .75, .80, and .67, respectively. The average
correlation across versions was .74, and the variation across versions was not significantly different from the variation that one
would expect based on sampling error alone, ␹2(4, N ⫽ 618) ⫽
8.29, p ⬎ .05. This finding replicates earlier findings that responses to the same life satisfaction item within an interview are
reliable (Andrews & Withey, 1976).
In summary, in Study 5 we examined whether stronger itemorder effects could be obtained with single-item indicators of life
satisfaction over a limited time period. The data show that this is
not the case.

General Discussion
In the present article we provide a thorough examination of the
stability of life satisfaction judgments and the relative contribution
of temporarily accessible information and chronically accessible
information on life satisfaction judgments. A meta-analysis re-

Table 5
Domain Global Correlations in Study 5
Domain
Weather
Housing
Health
Parents
a

Global–
specific
.26
.36
.44
.45

N
a

126
126a
126a
126a

Specific–
global

N

z

Effect size d

Effect size r

.30
.38
.47
.21

99
121
108
164

0.28
0.13
0.36
⫺1.99*

0.09
0.08
0.08
⫺0.54

.04
.04
.04
⫺.26

All global-specific correlations are based on the same sample.
* p ⬍ .05.

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

404

vealed that retest correlations over relatively short time intervals of
up to 1 year were high and systematically decreased over longer
time intervals. This pattern suggests that the assessment situation
has relatively weak effects on these judgments and that changes in
life satisfaction over longer time intervals reflect true changes in
life satisfaction. A meta-analysis of studies that manipulated item
order to test the influence of temporarily accessible information
demonstrated small effects of item order that would not change the
interpretation of domain– global correlations. This finding was
confirmed in five new studies with a total sample size of 1,396
participants. The new studies also demonstrated that global life
satisfaction judgments were highly correlated with chronically
accessible information about important life domains. Consistent
with Schwarz and Strack’s (1999) judgment model, neither priming of irrelevant domains nor priming chronically accessible information produced notable item-order effects. These findings
undermine two arguments against the validity of life satisfaction
judgments, namely that these judgments are too unstable and too
context dependent to be useful indicators of subjective well-being.
It is important to note that our findings do not automatically imply
that life satisfaction judgments are valid because stability over the
short term and consistency across assessment contexts are necessary but not sufficient for life satisfaction judgments to be valid.

Implications
We believe that our findings have three important consequences
for the future of subjective well-being research. First, the results
provide unambiguous evidence regarding the stability and context
sensitivity of life satisfaction judgments. Thus, we were able to
resolve the controversy about the magnitude and practical importance of context effects (Diener & Suh, 1999; Schwarz & Strack,
1999). Although temporarily accessible information has a statistically significant effect on the correlations between domain satisfaction and life satisfaction and may lead to somewhat weaker
retest correlations, these effects are typically too small to have
practical significance. This conclusion does not challenge Schwarz
and Strack’s (1999) general judgment model of life satisfaction.
Indeed, this conclusion is consistent with two main postulates of
this model, namely that people will disregard irrelevant information even if it is temporarily accessible and that priming information that is already chronically accessible information has weak
effect because chronically accessible information is used even if it
was not made temporarily accessible. Thus, both personality and
social psychologists can be happy with our findings.
The second implication of our findings is that subjective wellbeing researchers should pay more attention to the cognitive processes underlying life satisfaction judgments. Whereas past research on cognitive processes has focused on the effects of
temporarily accessible information on these judgments, our findings suggest that most of the variance in life satisfaction judgments
is due to chronically accessible information about important life
domains. Very little is known about the cognitive processes underlying the use of chronically accessible information. Important
issues in future research are, for example, (a) individual differences in the chronic accessibility of domains, (b) changes in the
chronic accessibility of domains over the life span, and the (c)
contribution of domain satisfaction to interrater agreement in life
satisfaction judgments.

Third, our model implies that life satisfaction is based to a large
extent on satisfaction in important life domains. Thus, domain
satisfaction is the most proximal determinant of life satisfaction,
and examining the determinants of domain satisfaction can provide
important information about the determinants of life satisfaction.
Last, our findings have important implications for the assessment of subjective well-being and recent efforts to create a national well-being index (Diener, 2000). Kahneman (1999) proposed that well-being should be defined as the balance of pleasant
and unpleasant momentary experiences. This proposal was based
in part on the assumption that life satisfaction judgments are
invalid. Our findings suggest that life satisfaction judgments are an
important indicator of well-being. Furthermore, Kahneman’s proposal to rely exclusively on sampling of affective experiences has
some limitations. First, philosophers have pointed out problems in
hedonistic theories of well-being and have proposed that life
satisfaction is a superior indicator of well-being (Sumner, 1996).
Second, experience sampling data can also be biased by response
styles (Schimmack, Bockenholt, et al., 2002; Watson & Tellegen,
2002) and sometimes show poor convergent validity with other
measures (Spain, Eaton, & Funder, 2000). Third, experience sampling data are much more expensive to obtain than life satisfaction
judgments and it is uncertain that the benefits outweigh the costs.
Last, life satisfaction has been studied for decades and this research has provided important insights into the determinants of
subjective well-being. Our findings suggest that it would be unwise to discard all of this information. Rather, experiencesampling studies and similar measures (Kahneman, Krueger,
Schkade, Schwarz, & Stone, 2004) should complement rather than
replace traditional life satisfaction judgments.

References
*References marked with an asterisk indicate studies included in the
meta-analysis.
*Adams, V. H. (1997). A paradox in African American quality of life.
Social Indicators Research, 42, 205–219.
*Alfonso, V. C., Allison, D. B., & Dunn, G. M. (1992). Sexual fantasy and
satisfaction: A multidimensional analysis of gender differences. Journal
of Psychology & Human Sexuality, 5(3), 19 –37.
Andrews, S. B., & Withey, S. B. (1976). Social indicators of well-being:
Americans’ perceptions of life quality. New York: Plenum Press.
*Atkinson, T. (1982). The stability and validity of quality of life measures.
Social Indicators Research, 10, 113–132.
*Baur P. A., & Okun M. A. (1983). Stability of life satisfaction in late life.
Gerontologist, 23, 261–265.
*Blais, M. R., Vallerand, R. J., Pelletier, L. G., & Brière, N. M. (1989). The
satisfaction scale: Canadian-French validation of the Satisfaction With
Life Scale. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science, 21, 210 –223.
*Brief, A. P., Butcher, A. H., George, J. M., & Link, K. E. (1993).
Integrating bottom-up and top-down theories of subjective well-being:
The case of health. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64,
646 – 653.
Browne, M. W., & Cudeck, R. (1993). Alternative ways of assessing model
fit. In K. A. Bollen & J. S. Long (Eds.), Testing structural equation
models (pp. 136 –162). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
*Campbell, A., Converse, P. E., & Rodgers, W. L. (1976). The quality of
American life: Perceptions, evaluations, and satisfactions. New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
*Chamberlain, K., & Zika, S. (1992). Stability and change in subjective
well-being over short time periods. Social Indicators Research, 26,
101–117.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

LIFE SATISFACTION JUDGMENTS
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences
(2nd ed.). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cohen, J. (1994). The earth is round ( p ⬍ .05). American Psychologist, 49,
997–1003.
Conley, J. J. (1984). The hierarchy of consistency: A review and model of
longitudinal findings on adult individual differences in intelligence,
personality and self-opinion. Personality & Individual Differences, 5,
11–25.
*Cramer, D. (1995). Life and job satisfaction: A two-wave panel study.
Journal of Psychology: Interdisciplinary & Applied., 129, 261–267.
Diener, E. (2000). Subjective well-being: The science of happiness and a
proposal for a national index. American Psychologist, 55, 34 – 43.
Diener, E., Emmons, R. A., Larsen, R. J., & Griffin, S. (1985). The
Satisfaction With Life Scale. Journal of Personality Assessment, 49,
71–75.
Diener, E., & Lucas, R. E. (1999). Personality and subjective well-being.
In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The
foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 213–229). New York: Russell
Sage Foundation.
Diener, E., & Suh, E. M. (1999). National differences in subjective wellbeing. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, & N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being:
The foundations of hedonic psychology (pp. 434 – 452). New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
*Diener, E., Suh, E. M., Lucas, R. E., & Smith, H. L. (1999). Subjective
well-being: Three decades of progress. Psychological Bulletin, 125,
276 –302.
Eid, M., & Diener, E. (2004). Global judgments of subjective well-being:
Situational variability and long-term stability. Social Indicators Research, 65, 245–277.
Epstein, S., & O’Brien, E. J. (1985). The person–situation debate in
historical and current perspective. Psychological Bulletin, 98, 513–537.
*Fujita, F., & Diener, E. (2005). Life satistaction set point: Stability and
change. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 158 –164.
*Gilman, R., & Huebner, E. S. (2000). Review of life satisfaction measures
for adolescents. Behaviour Change: Special Adolescent Health, 17,
178 –195.
*Glatzer, W. (1984). Life-satisfaction and alternative measures of SWB. In
W. Glatzer & W. Zapf (Eds.), Quality of life in Germany (pp. 177–191).
Frankfurt: Campus.
*Haberstroh, S., Oyserman, D., Schwarz, N., Kühnen, U., & Ji, L.-J.
(2002). Is the interdependent self more sensitive to question context than
the independent self? Self-construal and the observation of conversational norms. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 323–329.
*Headey, B., & Wearing, A. (1989). Personality, life events, and subjective
well-being: Toward a dynamic equilibrium model. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 57, 731–739.
Heller, D., Watson, D., & Hies, R. (2004). The role of person versus
situation in life satisfaction: A critical examination. Psychological Bulletin, 130, 574 – 600.
*Horley, J., & Lavery, J. J. (1991). The stability and sensitivity of subjective well-being measures. Social Indicators Research, 24, 113–122.
Hu, L., & Bentler, P. M. (1998). Fit indices in covariance structure
modeling: Sensitivity to underparameterized model misspecification.
Psychological Methods, 3, 424 – 453.
Kahneman, D. (1999). Objective happiness. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, &
N. Schwarz (Eds.), Well-being: The foundations of hedonic psychology
(pp. 3–25). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Kahneman, D., Krueger, A. B., Schkade, D., Schwarz, N., & Stone, A. A.
(December 3, 2004). A survey method for characterizing daily life
experience: The day reconstruction method. Science, 306, 1776 –1780.
Kenrick, D. T., & Funder, D. C. (1988). Profiting from controversy:
Lessons from the person-situation debate. American Psychologist, 43,
23–34.
*Lang, F. R., & Heckhausen, J. (2001). Perceived control over develop-

405

ment and subjective well-being: Differential benefits across adulthood.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 509 –523.
Lavine, H., Huff, J. W., Wagner, S. H., & Sweeney, D. (1998). The
moderating influence of attitude strength on the susceptibility to context
effects in attitude surveys. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 359 –373.
*Lepper, H. (1998). Use of other-reports to validate subjective well-being
measures. Social Indicators Research, 44, 367–379.
*Lucas, R. E., Diener, E., & Suh, E. (1996). Discriminant validity of
well-being measures. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71,
616 – 628.
*Lyubomirsky, S. (2001). Why are some people happier than others? The
role of cognitive and motivational processes in subjective well-being.
American Psychologist, 56, 239 –249.
*Magnus, K., Diener, E., Fujita, F., & Pavot, W. (1993). Extraversion and
neuroticism as predictors of objective life events: A longitudinal analysis. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 1046 –1053.
*Marks, G. N., & Fleming, N. (1999). The influences and consequences of
well-being among Australian young people: 1980 –1995. Social Indicators Research, 46, 301–323.
Oishi, S. (2004). Personality and culture: A neo-Allportian view. Journal
of Research in Personality, 38, 68 –74.
Palmore, E, & Kivett, V. (1977). Change in life satisfaction: A longitudinal
study of persons aged 46 –70. Journal of Gerontology, 32, 311–316.
*Pavot, W., & Diener, E. (1993a). The affective and cognitive context of
self-reported measures of subjective well-being. Social Indicators Research, 28, 1–20.
Pavot, W., & Diener, E. (1993b). Review of the Satisfaction With Life
Scale. Psychological Assessment, 5, 164 –172.
*Pavot, W., Diener, E., Colvin, C., & Sandvik, E. (1991). Further validation of the Satisfaction With Life Scale: Evidence for the cross-method
convergence of well-being measures. Journal of Personality Assessment,
57, 149 –161.
Roberts, B. W., & Caspi, A. (2001). Personality development and the
person-situation debate: It’s deja vu all over again. Psychological Inquiry, 12, 104 –109.
Roberts, B. W., & DelVecchio, W. F. (2000). The rank-order consistency
of personality traits from childhood to old age: A quantitative review of
longitudinal studies. Psychological Bulletin, 126, 3–25.
Robinson, M. D., & Clore, G. L. (2002). Belief and feeling: Evidence for
an accessibility model of emotional self-report. Psychological Bulletin,
128, 934 –960.
Rorer, L. G. (1965). The great response-style myth. Psychological Bulletin,
63, 129 –156.
Rudman, L. A., Gonzales, M. H., & Borgida, E. (1995). My transplant is
my life: Compliance status as a moderator of differential susceptibility to
item context effects. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21,
340 –348.
*Saris, W. E. (2001). The relationship between income and satisfaction:
The effect of measurement error and suppressor variables. Social Indicators Research, 53, 117–136.
Schimmack, U. (2004). [Importance of life domains]. Unpublished raw
data.
Schimmack, U., Bockenholt, U., & Reisenzein, R. (2002a). Response
styles in affect ratings: Making a mountain out of a molehill. Journal of
Personality Assessment, 78, 461– 483.
Schimmack, U., Diener, E., & Oishi, S. (2002b). Life-satisfaction is a
momentary judgment and a stable personality characteristic: The use of
chronically accessible and stable sources. Journal of Personality, 70,
345–385.
Schimmack, U., Oishi, S., Furr, R. M., & Funder, D. C. (2004). Personality
and life satisfaction: A facet-level analysis. Personality and Social
Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1062–1075.
Schimmack, U., Radhakrishnan, P., Oishi, S., Dzokoto, V., & Ahadi, S.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

406

SCHIMMACK AND OISHI

(2002). Culture, personality, and subjective well-being: Integrating process models of life-satisfaction. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 1313–1329.
*Schyns, B. (2001). Determinants of willingness for an occupational
change of employees on low levels of hierarchy. Unpublished doctoral
dissertation, University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
*Schuman, H., & Presser, S. (1981). Questions and answers in attitude
surveys: Experiments in question form, wording, and context. New
York: Academic Press.
Schwarz, N., & Strack, F. (1999). Reports of subjective well-being: Judgmental processes and their methodological implications. In D. Kahneman, E. Diener, and N. Schwarz (Eds.) Well-being: The foundations of
hedonic psychology (pp. 61– 84). New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
*Schwarz, N., Strack, F., & Mai, H. (1991). Assimilation and contrast
effects in part–whole question sequences: A conversational logic analysis. Public Opinion Quarterly, 55(1), 3–23.
Schwarzer, R. (1995). Meta 5.3 [Computer software]. Retrieved January
12, 2004, from http://www.fu-berlin.de/gesund/gesu_engl/meta_e.htm
Sears, R. (1977). Sources of life satisfactions of the Terman gifted men.
American Psychologist, 32, 119 –128.
*Smith, T. (1982). Conditional order effects (General Social Survey. Tech.
Rep. No. 33). Chicago: National Opinion Research Center.
Snedecor, G. W., & Cochran, W. G. (1980), Statistical methods (7th ed.).
Ames: Iowa State University Press.
Spain, J. S., Eaton, L. G., & Funder, D. C. (2000). Perspectives on
personality: The relative accuracy of self vs. others for the prediction of
behavior and emotion. Journal of Personality, 68, 837– 867.
Stones, M. J., & Kozma, A. (1984). Life events and the elderly: A study of

incidence, structure, stability, and impact. Canadian Journal on Aging,
3, 193–198.
*Strack, F., Martin, L. L., & Schwarz, N. (1988). Priming and communication: Social determinants of information use in judgments of life
satisfaction. European Journal of Social Psychology, 18, 429 – 442.
Sumner, L. W. (1996). Welfare, happiness, and ethics. Oxford, United
Kingdom: Clarendon Press.
Terry, T., & Huebner, E. S. (1995). The relationship between self-concept
and life satisfaction in children. Social Indicators Research, 35, 39 –52.
*Tourangeau, R., Rasinski, K. A., & Bradburn, N. (1991). Measuring
happiness in surveys: A test of the subtraction hypothesis. Public Opinion Quarterly, 55, 255–266.
Turner, C. E. (1984). Why do surveys disagree? Some preliminary hypotheses and some disagreeable examples. In C. E. Turner & E. Martin
(Eds.), Surveying subjective phenomena (pp. 195–214). New York:
Russell Sage Foundation.
*Vitterso, J. (2001). Personality traits and subjective well-being: Emotional
stability, not extraversion, is probably the important predictor. Personality & Individual Differences, 31, 903–914.
Watson, D., & Tellegen, A. (2002). Aggregation, acquiescence, and the
assessment of trait affectivity. Journal of Research in Personality, 36,
589 –597.
Yardley, J. K., & Rice, R. W. (1991). The relationship between mood and
subjective well-being. Social Indicators Research, 24, 101–111.

Received May 12, 2004
Revision received February 16, 2005
Accepted February 26, 2005 䡲

