Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

Contents lists available at ScienceDirect

Social Science & Medicine
journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/socscimed

Antiretroviral therapy and reproductive life projects: Mitigating the stigma of
AIDS in Nigeria
Daniel Jordan Smith a, *, Benjamin C. Mbakwem b
a
b

Department of Anthropology, Brown University, Box 1921, 128 Hope Street, Providence, RI, United States
Community and Youth Development Initiatives, 54 Ekwema Crescent, Ikenegbu Layout, Owerri, Imo State, Nigeria

a r t i c l e i n f o

a b s t r a c t

Article history:
Available online 29 April 2010

As millions of people infected with HIV in Africa are increasingly able to live longer and healthier lives
because of access to antiretroviral therapy, concerns have emerged that people might eschew protective
practices after their health improves. Extending beyond the notion of sexual “disinhibition,” researchers
have begun to analyze the sexual behavior of people in treatment through the perspective of their
marital and childbearing aspirations. This article explores the reproductive life projects of HIV-positive
men and women in southeastern Nigeria, showing how actions that contradict medical advice are
understandable in the context of patients’ socially normative desires for marriage and children. Based on
in-depth interviews and observations (JuneeDecember 2004; JuneeJuly 2006; JuneeJuly 2007) of
people enrolled in the region’s oldest treatment program, we argue that broadly held social expectations
with regard to reproduction are experienced even more acutely by HIV-positive people. This is because in
Nigeria the stigma associated with AIDS is closely tied to widespread perceptions of social and moral
crisis, such that AIDS itself is seen as both a cause and a symptom of anxiety-producing forms of social
change. Speciﬁcally, in an era of rapid societal transformation, Nigerians see sexual promiscuity and the
alienation of young people from traditional obligations to kin and community as indicative of threatened
social reproduction. For people who are HIV-positive, marrying and having children offer not only the
opportunity to lead normal lives, but also a means to mitigate the stigma associated with the disease.
Four ethnographic case studies are provided to exemplify how and why social and personal life projects
can trump or complicate medical and public health priorities. These examples suggest that treatment
programs must openly address and proactively support the life projects of people on antiretroviral
therapy if the full beneﬁts of expanded access to treatment are to be realized.
Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords:
Nigeria
Antiretroviral therapy (ART)
HIV/AIDS
Life projects
Marriage
Reproduction
Stigma

Introduction
Over the past several years, antiretroviral therapy (ART) for HIV
and AIDS has become widely available in poor countries, with
millions of people beneﬁting from increased donor commitments,
lower drug costs, and expanding governmental and non-governmental programs. This enormous increase in access is laudable for
enabling people to live longer and healthier lives despite HIV
infection. However, it also creates a whole range of new possibilities and problems, as those receiving treatment re-imagine and
forge their larger “life projects” e that is, the socially attuned and
culturally inﬂected aims and aspirations they have for their life
course. In particular, as people realize that HIV infection is no
longer a certain death sentence, they strive to actualize their most
important priorities, which in Nigeria (and elsewhere) almost
* Corresponding author. Tel.: þ1 401 863 7065; fax: þ1 401 863 7588.
E-mail address: daniel_j_smith@brown.edu (D.J. Smith).
0277-9536/$ e see front matter Ó 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.socscimed.2010.04.006

always include sexual relations, marriage, and childbearing. Yet
even as ART enables men and women living with HIV to embark on
the life projects of marriage and reproduction, they also face
numerous social, ethical, and medical dilemmas as they try to live
out their ambitions and live up to social norms. Although ART
permits people with HIV to hope for and undertake these life
projects, it also complicates them, as the medical consequences and
public health implications of sex and reproduction conﬂict with
personal priorities and social expectations. Conversely, achieving
their reproductive goals frequently impinges on people’s capacity
to stay on therapy, follow recommended treatment regimes, and
take adequate precautions to protect others (and themselves) from
further infection.
As in many parts of the world, life-saving antiretroviral drugs
(ARVs) have only recently become more widely available to
Nigerians. Africa’s most populous country, with more than 140
million people, has an adult HIV infection rate estimated to be 3.1
percent, translating into approximately 2.6 million people currently

346

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

living with the virus (UNAIDS, 2008). The Nigerian federal
government launched a small-scale treatment program in 2001
that enrolled fewer than 10,000 people over four years. In late
2005, in conjunction with the increased support for antiretroviral
therapy provided by international donors such as The Global Fund
and the U.S. President’s Emergency Plan for AIDS Relief, Nigeria’s
President Olusegun Obasanjo announced that all people in the
country who need ART (deﬁned in Nigeria as people with CD4
counts below 200 or who present with AIDS) would receive drugs
free of charge. The initial goal was to reach 250,000 people by June
2006. While this ambitious target was not achieved, 2008 estimates
indicate that approximately 200,000 Nigerians are receiving
treatment through the scaled-up program, and enrollment
continues to grow.
As ART has expanded, attention has begun to turn to the
implications of treatment with regard to prevention, and speciﬁcally the sexual behavior of recipients (Cusick & Rhodes, 2000;
Lurie et al., 2008; Moore & Oppong, 2007; Seeley et al., 2009).
Part of the motivation for studies of the sexual behavior of people
on ART is a fear that successful treatment will lead to sexual
“disinhibition” e that is, with the availability of successful treatment, people may eschew protective behaviors. Research in
developing countries has mainly addressed behavior identiﬁed as
risky by utilizing quantitative data from surveys (Bateganya et al.,
2005; Loubiere et al., 2009; Moatti et al., 2003). More recently,
studies have considered the sexual behavior of people on ART from
the perspective of their marital and reproductive goals (Cooper,
Harries, Myer, Orner, & Bracken, 2007; Homsy et al., 2009; Myer,
Morroni, & Rebe, 2007). This trajectory of research suggests that
the conduct of people in treatment for HIV must be understood
through a lens that connects sexuality to gender, reproduction, and
larger social contexts (Gruskin, Firestone, MacCarthy, & Ferguson,
2008; Hirsch, 2007; Laher et al., 2009; Persson & Richards, 2008).
But surprisingly little ethnographic research has been undertaken
on the topic (for exceptions, see Castro, Khawja, & González-Núñez,
2007; Watt et al., 2009; Ware et al., 2009). An anthropological
approach can provide the wider social perspective and the intimate
details of individual lives that are necessary to make sense of
behaviors that would otherwise be difﬁcult to understand.
This paper reports on ethnographic research conducted among
people on ART in southeastern Nigeria, focusing particularly on the
intersection between the therapeutic itineraries of individuals on
treatment and their reproductive life projects. Four emblematic
case studies are presented to understand how marriage and
childbearing are particularly salient in explaining why people’s
larger life projects can complicate and even trump medical and
public health priorities in Nigeria and beyond. In an era of rapid
social change, anxieties about the future of traditional kinship are
widespread. Ordinary Nigerians often interpret HIV and AIDS as
symptomatic of a general sense of social and moral crisis in which
perceptions of unfettered promiscuous sex abound. In response to
widely shared apprehensions about social reproduction, young
Nigerians e regardless of their HIV status e commonly experience
intense pressures to marry and have children. But for people who
are HIV-positive, these expectations are even sharper, not only
because ART makes possible the desire to reclaim normal life
courses, but also because part of AIDS’s social stigma derives from
its moral association with the breakdown of pro-kinship values that
are widely perceived to be essential to stable social reproduction.
For people who are on ART, successful marriage and childbearing
are inextricably tied to protecting their social reputations, hiding
their HIV-positive status, and avoiding stigma. Marrying and
having children offer path to normalcy, but also a way of countering
the popular perception that people contract HIV because they
behave in ways that ﬂout widely accepted moral notions that

connect sex and social reproduction. Marriage and fertility fulﬁll
these obligations of social reproduction, contesting the idea that
AIDS is a cause and a symptom of social and moral failures. In
Nigeria e and arguably in many African settings where the situation
is similar e successful expansion of treatment and continued efforts
at prevention require policies and programs that more readily
acknowledge and more explicitly enable people’s larger life projects.
Research setting and methods
The ﬁndings presented in this paper are the result of several
years of work and study by the authors with patients receiving
ARVs from the Federal Medical Centre (FMC) in the southeastern
Nigerian city of Owerri. Until recently, FMC-Owerri was the only
facility in the region offering ART. The hospital initially enrolled 450
adults living with HIV, and from 2002 through 2005 these individuals received drugs at a highly subsidized rate (less than $10 per
person per month). In 2006, following the new policy of free drugs
and the plans for a massive scale-up, FMC-Owerri began expanding
its government-supported program with a target of 2000 patients.
By 2007 this target was achieved.
The ﬁrst author has worked in southeastern Nigeria since 1989,
initially as a public health advisor based in Owerri for three years,
and since 1994 as an anthropologist. He has studied Nigeria’s HIV
epidemic since 2000, and from 2004 to 2007 conducted extended
interviews with people receiving ART through the FMC-Owerri
program. In 2004, he led the Nigeria component of an NIH-funded
ﬁve-country comparative ethnographic research project, “Love,
Marriage, and HIV,” in which the marital and reproductive experiences and plans of people on ART became an important subtheme of the larger study (Hirsch et al., 2009).
The second author founded the Owerri-based non-governmental organization, Community and Youth Development Initiatives (CYDI), in 2001, with the principal aim of addressing Nigeria’s
AIDS epidemic by mobilizing local people and resources to increase
effective prevention, offer counseling, and provide care and support
for individuals living with the virus. CYDI has worked to organize
prevention activities for hard-to-reach populations like urban nonschool youths, created the most prominent and popular center for
counseling and information about HIV and AIDS in the city, and
helped to found the ﬁrst support group in Imo State for people
living with HIV, called the Association for Positive Care (AsPoCa),
which is comprised of dozens of individuals receiving ART through
the FMC-Owerri program. The second author has counseled scores
of people who are HIV-positive.
The ﬁndings in the paper are the result of the observations,
interviews, and experiences of the authors working with HIVinfected people receiving ART. Participants were recruited through
information provided about the study on clinic days and at meetings of a local support group for people living with HIV. This
opportunistic sample included a range of ages and marital statuses,
equal numbers of men and women, and individuals who had been
on treatment for as long as four years and as brieﬂy as six months.
Interviews were conducted by the authors, in mixtures of English,
Pidgin English, and Igbo, with 22 people receiving treatment.
Interviews were transcribed (and, where necessary, translated into
English) and coded using the qualitative software data organizing
program, Atlas.ti. Interviews were supplemented by observations
and interactions with study subjects outside the context of formal
interviews. All of the names of the individuals whose cases are
described are pseudonyms, and aspects of their stories have been
disguised to protect their anonymity. Each interviewee provided
formal consent to participate in the study and IRB approval for the
research was obtained at Brown University in the USA and at Abia
State University in Nigeria.

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

Conceptual framework and analytical approach
The interpretation of research ﬁndings is grounded in
a conceptual framework that situates the reproductive and therapeutic behavior of people on ART in the context of widespread
anxieties about social reproduction created by Nigeria’s AIDS
epidemic, together with the enduring importance of marriage and
fertility e both generally, and as these values have been accentuated by the threat of AIDS. As in many African societies, in Igbospeaking southeastern Nigeria marriage remains one of the most
important individual aspirations and social duties in a person’s life
(Isiugo-Abanihe, 1998; Smith, 2001). It is hard to overstate the
centrality of matrimony in the life course. In Igbo society, marriage
is nearly universal and the failure to marry is highly stigmatizing.
Marital unions are seen as a collective project in which extended
families and communities are highly invested.
Yet at the same time that marriage remains a pillar of social
reproduction and a pivotal rite of passage in the individual life
course, the institution has not been immune to the dramatic pace of
social change that characterizes contemporary Nigeria. In general,
younger people are more likely than their parents to name
romantic love as a signiﬁcant criterion for selecting a spouse, and
the notion of individual choice (as opposed to arranged marriage) is
now widely accepted (though, in fact, families still exert considerable inﬂuence). Today, in addition to inﬂation in the amount of
expected bridewealth required for marriage (bridewealth being the
gifts that are transferred from the husband’s family to the wife’s
family), the costs of wedding ceremonies are exorbitant. As a result
of all these changes, although marriage is universally expected in
Igbo society, elders are anxious about the types of partners that
young people might choose and young people are worried about
whether they can ever afford a wedding.
The AIDS epidemic intersects with these anxieties in powerful
ways. The stigma attached to HIV and AIDS is inextricably intertwined with a collective sense that processes of social change are
unsettling, and with the tendency to blame individual moral failures for this perception of decline. In Nigeria, as in many places in
Africa, HIV is perceived as a disease of modernity, associated with
social changes attributed to urbanization, globalization, and
development (Setel, 1999). A widespread sense of social crisis is
expressed in the idiom of moral decline, and nowhere is this unease
more powerfully articulated than with regard to concerns over
sexual promiscuity. It is one of the great ironies of the African HIV
epidemic that while Western societies tend to depict AIDS as the
consequence of traditional African sexual and cultural practices, in
African societies people explain AIDS as the result of too much
change, excessive Western inﬂuence, and the bastardization of
traditional culture (Rodlach, 2007; Setel, 1996). The association of
modern sexualities with anxieties about growing individualism,
unbridled materialism, and threatened social reproduction ﬁnds
a ready medium for expression in the AIDS epidemic, a fact that
reverberates in the lives of Nigerians who are HIV-positive.
Until the availability of ART, the notion that HIV was not only
a medical death sentence but also a social death sentence was very
much the perception in Nigeria. Understanding the nature of the
social death sentence, and the restoration of life projects enabled by
ART, requires recognizing that stigmatization of the disease is
bound up with the fact that a life cut short by AIDS was often a life
without reproduction. It is possible to hide one’s HIV status, but it is
not possible to hide whether or not one is married and has children,
a point that will emerge repeatedly in the four case studies that
follow.
With the possibility of treatment and a prolonged life, the most
important goals that people receiving ART pursue are the life
projects of marriage and childbearing. We argue that the high

347

priority that people on ART attach to marriage and reproduction is
explained not only by their overall value in Nigerian society, but
also by the fact that HIV itself is associated with the very threats to
social reproduction e by which we mean perceptions of widespread promiscuity and challenges to kinship and community
posed by contemporary social change e that are so widely decried
in Nigeria. Although it is possible to achieve one without the other,
and although we have separated the discussions of marriage and
childbearing for analytical purposes, as the cases below show, for
many people the desires for marriage and children e and the effort
to realize these aspirations e are mutually constituted and deeply
intertwined.
The following analysis will present and explicate four separate
case studies. These were chosen for the ways that they illustrate
and represent more general themes in how many individuals
balance their life projects with their ARV treatment. We describe
each case study in detail in order to highlight the threads that were
common across our larger subject population, as well as the ways in
which each individual’s seemingly contradictory or risky choices
can best be understood in the broader context of their lives.

Therapeutic itineraries and pathways to marriage
For unmarried young adults and older adults widowed by AIDS,
as the shock of an HIV diagnosis is mitigated over time and as the
positive effects of ART are experienced in terms of restored health
and a psychological realization of a possible future, the desire for
and obstacles to ﬁnding a marriage partner become the most
pressing issues they face. Finding a spouse while taking ARVs
creates ethical dilemmas about disclosure, poses impediments to
taking the drugs, and generates possible risks to the health of both
partners in such relationships. At counseling sessions offered in
conjunction with ART, patients are made well aware of the medical
necessity of strict observance of therapy regimens and the dangers
to themselves and others if they engage in unprotected sex. It
should be noted that considerable evidence exists that as ART
lowers viral loads it also reduces the risk of transmission (Attia,
Egger, Müller, Zwahlen, & Low, 2009). But in Nigeria the common
message ART patients receive is that sex without condoms is risky.
However, condom use is complicated by the fact that unprotected
sex is commonly seen in southeastern Nigeria as both a marker of
trust and an expression of the possibility that a relationship could
evolve into marital union with children (Smith, 2004). Public health
messages about how to keep oneself and others healthy clash with
social expectations and conventions about how to conduct a relationship that might lead to marriage. The challenges of navigating
the landscape of sex, marriage, and reproduction are intensiﬁed by
the fact that HIV itself is seen as a symbol of social crisis and moral
decline.
Ifeoma’s story illustrates some of the typical dynamics that
unfold as a person on ARVs begins to reconstruct a life project,
looking to marry but struggling with whether or how to reveal her
status, and how to take her drugs while in a relationship with a man
who did not know that she was HIV-positive. Ifeoma came to the
FMC-Owerri in December 2002 desperately sick. She had large
ulcers in her mouth. She couldn’t eat and appeared severely wasted
e even on the verge of death. Ifeoma tested positive for both HIV1
and HIV2 and was immediately started on ART. Over time she
recovered remarkably well, to the point where the staff at CYDI said
that her plump ﬁgure and smooth skin were prime examples of the
astonishing effects of ARVs and evidence of the veracity of the
often-cited AIDS message in Nigeria that “AIDS no dey show for
face” (Pidgin English for “you cannot tell if someone has HIV by
looking at them”).

348

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

A couple of years prior to her illness, Ifeoma had been separated
from her husband. Shortly after their ﬁrst child was born, they had
a serious ﬁght that led her to return to her family and her natal
community. The separation lasted several months and at one point
during this estrangement she heard that both her husband and her
infant son were sick. Before she could arrange to visit, she learned
that they both had died. Rumors circulated that the man died of
AIDS. At that time, Ifeoma’s mother urged her to get an HIV test, but
she refused. She felt perfectly ﬁne and did not believe that her
husband and child had died of AIDS, much less that she could feel
so healthy and also be infected.
About seven months later she became ill with a fever and
diarrhea and went to a local hospital. Unknown to her, the hospital
conducted an HIV test. She recalled being summoned to the
doctor’s ofﬁce, without any of the preparations of pretest counseling. The doctor began by saying things like “you know, in this
world man proposes but God disposes” and “some news can appear
to be too bad, but over time we realize it’s not the end of the world.”
He then revealed that she was HIV-positive. Ifeoma reportedly
fainted and remembers waking up with water being thrown on her
face and a crowd of doctors and nurses surrounding her.
After her husband’s death but prior to learning of her HIVpositive status, she had begun a relationship with a man in a nearby
city. When she got sick her new partner did not know of the extent
of her illness or her HIV status because she had returned to her
natal home. Prior to her illness, Ifeoma and her boyfriend had
frequent unprotected sex and the man was encouraging her to get
pregnant to “fast-forward” a marriage. He wanted evidence of her
fecundity before formalizing their relationship. After learning that
she was HIV-positive, Ifeoma felt she could not tell him her status
without jeopardizing the relationship. She believed that once he
found out he would make inquiries about her past and discover the
rumors that her ﬁrst husband had died of AIDS. This news, she
thought, would make him suspect that she began having unprotected sex with him knowing full well that she was HIV-positive.
Further, she felt it was impossible to introduce condoms into their
sexual relationship given their shared desire for her to get pregnant. There would be no reasonable way to explain her sudden
desire for protection.
Taking her drugs required vigilance to maintain her secret.
Each of Ifeoma’s three antiretroviral drugs was a separate pill and
each had to be taken twice a day. Combined with the various
vitamins she also took, it meant that a monthly supply was more
than 200 pills. To navigate this problem, Ifeoma took advantage of
one aspect of household gender inequality. She hid the pills under
the sink in the kitchen e a room, she reported, her boyfriend
almost never entered. Further, she would time her dishwashing e
a task he never undertook e to coincide with when she needed to
take her medications. In this way she managed to keep her secret
and stay on her drugs. At the time that we lost contact with
Ifeoma e she moved to the city of Port Harcourt with her
boyfriend and planned to try to collect her ARVs there e she was
still hoping to get pregnant, marry her boyfriend, and eventually
ﬁnd a way to disclose her status.
For many people on ARVs like Ifeoma, issues of disclosure are
central to the endeavor of navigating sexual and romantic relationships, and these issues frequently come to a head around plans
for marriage. With the increasing awareness of the risks of HIV in
Nigeria, many churches, including the Catholic Church, now require
couples to undergo HIV tests if they wish to be married in the
church. The prospect of being tested before marriage creates great
anxieties for individuals who are HIV-positive. People create all
kinds of ways to deal with this problem, including using premarital
testing as a way to gracefully disclose their infection without
revealing that they have previously kept it secret.

The case of Chinyere is illustrative. On World AIDS Day in
December 2003, Chinyere came to CYDI’s ofﬁce in search of help.
After crying until she was exhausted, she narrated her story to
Benjamin, this paper’s second author. Early in 2003 she had gone to
the hospital very sick. Unknown to her, she was admitted at an
institution notorious for its unwillingness to treat HIV cases. After
a short stay at the hospital a nurse asked her to follow her to the
doctor’s ofﬁce. Barely able to walk, Chinyere dragged herself into
the doctor’s consulting room. As she sat down he held up her lab
result and shouted: “Look at you! The sin of fornication has ﬁnally
caught up with you! Before I open my eyes I want you out of this
building. We don’t treat people like you here.” While the willingness of health professionals in Nigeria to treat HIV has improved
dramatically in recent years, some doctors still refuse to care for
AIDS patients, and hospitals and clinics can be venues for the
perpetuation of discrimination. Banished from that hospital, she
eventually received treatment from another doctor who willingly
treated HIV patients. She got well and for many months Chinyere
felt perfectly ﬁne. She put her HIV status out of her mind.
The following August, an Igbo man based in Europe whom her
family wanted her to marry came home for a visit, partly with the
idea of seeing whether Chinyere was the woman for him. As indicated earlier, in contemporary southeastern Nigeria, young people
increasingly choose their own spouses independent of family
preferences, often based on an ideal of romantic love, but the role of
families in suggesting possible spouses and advocating for (or
rejecting) particular unions remains prominent. Igbo men who
have migrated overseas are particularly liable to look for help in
ﬁnding “a good girl from home” to marry. When Obi returned to
Nigeria, he and Chinyere got along well. With his migrant’s wealth,
they traveled around the country and Chinyere enjoyed his
company. Eventually, they started having sex. Just before he was to
return to Europe, she fell sick e so sick that she could not even
escort him to Lagos for his departure.
When Chinyere arrived at CYDI she was frightened about her
future. During Obi’s visit things had gone so well that they had
initiated the ﬁrst steps in the traditional marriage ceremony and
Chinyere had moved in with her future mother-in-law. CYDI helped
her get immediate treatment, and eventually aided her in getting
enrolled in the ART program. She began to get well physically, but
in Chinyere’s mind she had bigger problems e the possibility that
her HIV infection would derail her marriage. Obi was a wealthy
man. He was sending money home to build a big house in his
village. Chinyere was handling the money, meaning that she always
had cash. Her future mother-in-law liked her. She and Obi genuinely seemed to care for each other. There was the added enticement that she might eventually join her husband overseas. The
possibility of losing it all if her HIV status was revealed was
terrifying.
Not too long after Chinyere started on her ARVs Obi arranged to
have the next steps of the traditional wedding ceremony undertaken in his absence. The traditional wedding, where the two
extended families come together to perform the customary rituals,
is often completed in the absence of one or both of the betrothed,
especially in this era of far-ﬂung migration. The plan was that they
would also be married in the church when Obi next returned to
Nigeria. In the week leading up to the traditional ceremony, Chinyere experienced terrible rashes all over her body, a common
reaction to nevirapine, one of the ﬁrst-line drugs in the ARV
combination provided in Nigeria’s ART program. She came to CYDI
frantic about her appearance, worried that someone might guess
that she had HIV, and fretting that she couldn’t possibly wear
a turtleneck at her traditional wedding ceremony, where the bride
is expected to dress in the latest fashions. She eventually told her
mother-in-law that she had an allergic reaction to an everyday

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

medication and this was the story conveyed to the larger wedding
party. Chinyere made it through the traditional wedding without
her HIV status being discovered, but she still faced the fact that Obi
would soon come home for the church wedding, and she had not
revealed her status to him.
The impending church wedding hastened her dilemma because
she and Obi were Catholics and, as mentioned above, HIV tests were
required of all couples wanting to marry in the church. Chinyere
came to CYDI pleading for assistance either to obtain a fake HIV lab
result or ﬁnd someone who was HIV-negative who could take the
test in her name. It is widely known that in Nigeria fake lab results
are sought and sometimes issued to enable church weddings.
When she was told that CYDI would not facilitate such a scam, she
discussed with her counselor other possibilities. She settled on the
idea that she would go together with her ﬁancé for pretest counseling, pretend it was her ﬁrst test, and feign horror when her result
was revealed. She banked on the hope that Obi would stick by her
when her status was revealed now that they were traditionally
married, and that she would avoid the worse consequences of his
discovering her longer-term deception.
On the appointed day, when she and Obi went for their results,
Chinyere fainted dramatically. Her gamble paid off. Although Obi
tested HIV-negative, he did not threaten divorce, as many Nigerian
men do when they ﬁnd out their wife is positive and they are
negative. CYDI staff attributed Obi’s seemingly enlightened
response to all the time he had spent in Europe, but we can only
speculate about the reasons for his tolerance because we were
unable to interview him. Perhaps the most illuminating aspect of
the story is that once Chinyere’s status was known Obi became a coconspirator in ﬁguring out how to get married in the Catholic
Church. He could accept his wife’s HIV status, but he could not live
without the social recognition of a church wedding and he
personally arranged to secure a fake result for Chinyere.
Chinyere eventually became pregnant, and with the aid of
treatment her child was born HIV-negative. She did not breastfeed
the baby boy and again had to invent an explanation to cover her
unusual behavior. Over time she lost contact with CYDI, but at last
report her marriage remained amicable, her child was healthy, and
only she and Obi knew her HIV status.
ART, reproduction, and “Normal Lives”
It is hard to exaggerate the importance of childbearing in
southeastern Nigeria and throughout much of Africa. As the
renowned anthropologist Meyer Fortes argued long ago, “parenthood is regarded as a sine qua non for the attainment of the full
development of the complete person to which all aspire” (1978:
125). Having children is not only a means to individual personhood,
but also a fulﬁllment of one’s obligations to kin and community.
Biological reproduction is part of social reproduction. Through
marriage and parenthood, one not only reproduces and replaces
individuals, one also creates and builds the social networks through
which people survive and prosper. Every Igbo person assumes he or
she will marry and have children, and childlessness is the highest of
calamities. Personal lives are devastated by it and popular culture is
obsessed with it, a fact illustrated by the frequency with which
infertility is a central theme in ﬁlms produced by Nigeria’s growing
video industry.
It this context, it is no wonder that for people on ART one of the
predominant aspirations once they begin to feel healthy is to have
children. Many ART patients embark on or resume childbearing, but
the process is fraught with social obstacles and potential health
consequences. A particularly poignant case exempliﬁes the social
and symbolic importance of children in Igbo society in general and
for people living with HIV in particular.

349

Ukachi was a young woman who periodically attended the
Monday ART clinic at FMC-Owerri to collect her drugs. But she did
not join the support group and seemed to have little or no interaction with other people on ARVs. One day, she approached a CYDI
staff member. She was worried that she might be infecting her
boyfriend or that she was being re-infected by him. They were
hoping to marry and have children and she didn’t know what to do.
It turned out that Ukachi was already a single mother. She had
a four-year-old son to whom she gave birth long before she
discovered she was HIV-positive. Over time, we learned that as
a teenager she had fallen deeply in love with her cousin. In Igbo
culture they were absolutely forbidden to marry and their relationship was a secret. They fantasized about moving abroad so that
they could be together but that was never possible. Although they
knew they could never marry, they decided to have a child together
as an enduring expression of their love. When Ukachi became
pregnant her family pressured her to reveal the identity of the
father, even beating her for the information, but she never exposed
her cousin. Eventually, he married and had children with another
woman, but he and Ukachi continued to proclaim their love to each
other and he secretly supported her in raising their child.
After several years of pining for her cousin, Ukachi resolved that
she too would have to marry and have a family of her own, and she
set her mind to that task. She started a relationship with a man
whom she thought might make a good husband. Several months
into that relationship, one of her relatives was in an accident and
she traveled to the hospital to donate blood. As part of that process
her blood was screened and she was informed that she was HIVpositive. She had never been sick and for several months she tried
to ignore the result, continuing her relationship with her boyfriend.
Finally, she decided to travel to Owerri to seek a conﬁrmatory test at
the FMC. She was indeed HIV-positive. She followed up with more
tests and when it was revealed that her CD4 count was low she
started on ARVs.
All of the information she had learned through post-test counseling and the programs run by CDYI made her fearful that she
might be infecting her boyfriend, but also apprehensive about
whether he might have infected her. He had recently been sick, but
claimed it was malaria. She wanted to persuade him to do an HIV
test, but didn’t know how without making him suspect she was
infected. He wanted her to get pregnant before they set a date for
marrying, so she was as worried about getting pregnant as about
protecting her health. With time, the boyfriend decided they
should proceed with the traditional wedding even though Ukachi
was not pregnant. Shortly after they married she became pregnant.
She stopped coming to Owerri for her drugs and for a long time we
lost contact.
Ukachi had moved to the city of Enugu with her new husband
and had indeed stopped taking her medication. We learned this
because when she was seven months pregnant she went for
antenatal care in Enugu and the clinic staff said they would not
agree to assist her delivery unless she did an HIV test. Faced with
the possibility of exposure (her husband still did not know her
status), she traveled to Owerri so that she could give birth at the
FMC. Once one of the most beautiful and healthy looking of all the
patients in the ART program, Ukachi looked sickly and wasted. She
stayed in Owerri long enough to have her baby, but returned shortly
thereafter to Enugu. When we asked why she had stopped taking
her medication, she said she feared she could not hide or explain all
the pills (as a patient coming from Enugu e two hours away e she
could collect three months of pills, which, including vitamins,
would amount to over 600 tablets). Rather than risk facing the
consequences of revealing her HIV status and possibly undermining her marriage, she chose to have a child who would solidify
the relationship and she stopped taking her drugs, even though

350

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

these actions posed potentially disastrous health consequences for
her, her baby, and others. It is impossible to understand Ukachi’s
therapeutic itinerary without accounting for the primacy of
marriage and reproduction in the socially shared conceptions of
why one would care to be alive in the ﬁrst place. For people who are
HIV-positive, fears of disclosure and awareness of the stigma
associated with AIDS heighten the urgency of constructing a life
project that looks normal to partners, family, and society.
Concerns about appearing normal extend beyond people who
are infected to their spouses and families. We observed numerous
cases where an uninfected spouse who knew his or her partner was
HIV-positive nevertheless exerted tremendous pressure to
procreate. Nnamdi was a founding member of AsPoCa, the Owerri
support group. He learned he was HIV-positive after becoming
extremely sick. At the time that he was diagnosed with HIV he tried
numerous treatments, including various traditional doctors,
without improving signiﬁcantly. When the FMC-Owerri ART
program began in 2002 he was one of the ﬁrst to enroll. He told his
wife of his problem immediately e in fact, he had no choice because
when he ﬁrst received his lab result several family members were
with him in the hospital and the indiscreet staff revealed his HIVpositive status to him in front of the visitors. His wife stuck by him
steadfastly. She tested negative for the virus. At the time of his
diagnosis they had two young sons.
Nnamdi said that when he was sick he never even thought of
sex, much less of having another child. But when he became better
after beginning ART he and his wife resumed a sexual relationship.
Nnamdi reported that he always used condoms. About a year or so
after he had started on ART, he sought counseling at CYDI because
his wife began putting pressure on him to have another child. As
a leader of AsPoCa he was well versed in the most up-to-date
information about risks, prevention, and treatment. He said he did
not want to expose his wife to HIV, and he was not inclined to risk
unprotected sex to produce a pregnancy when they already had
two HIV-negative sons. Because of the patrilineal structure of Igbo
lineages, people are greatly concerned with having sons to pass on
their names, land, and property. Normally, Nnamdi would have
been eager to have another child and happy to have a daughter, but
under the circumstances, he said, “I am ok with two sons.”
His wife, Ogechi, was, however, intensely desirous of having
a third child. Nnamdi wasn’t sure how to negotiate her increasing
insistence so he asked if he could bring Ogechi to CYDI for counseling. At CYDI she was told about the dangers of unprotected sex
for herself and about the possible risks of mother-to-child transmission. She knew the facts already and still wanted to get pregnant. She explained that her friends and relatives had been asking
for some time why she had not had another child. She said,
“Everyone is always asking about my next issue (offspring). I do not
feel normal with only two children. I can’t tell them why we are not
having more issues (children).” In addition to the social pressure to
have more children, she also expressed a strong desire for
a daughter. Regarding the possibility of contracting HIV herself, she
simply said, “My husband is healthy now that he is taking his drugs.
If I become infected I will also take drugs.” As with many Nigerians,
the desire for more children eclipsed any perspective on long-term
health risks to herself.
CYDI referred Ogechi to the doctor in charge of the ART clinic at
FMC-Owerri to make sure that she fully understood the medical
risks. To date, Ogechi has not had another child. But the reason was
not from a greater understanding of the health risks; it was due to
a change in her perception of her marriage, and particularly the
behavior of her husband, who she discovered was cheating on her.
Had Nnamdi not resumed a pattern of extramarital relationships
that Ogechi found reprehensible, there is no reason to think that
she wouldn’t have continued to insist on another child.

It should be clear that marriage and reproduction are among
the most important dimensions of forging a normal life in
southeastern Nigeria, a fact that is accentuated for people on ART
because HIV is associated with collective anxieties about social
reproduction. But of course in Nigeria, as everywhere, social
norms are by no means monolithic. A “normal” life is not
reducible to the duties promulgated in formal social conventions.
Nnamdi’s resumption of habitual extramarital sex is emblematic
of the multiple forms of normalcy and the kinds of resurrected
life projects that must be understood in the context of the
availability of antiretroviral treatment. In his public persona as an
AsPoCa leader and in private conversations with friends at CYDI
Nnamdi presented himself as someone who steadfastly adhered
to moral and medical codes, which prohibit extramarital sex. To
people who knew he was HIV-positive he spoke with great
authority about all the things that one must do e and that he said
he did e to protect the health of himself and others. But over time
we began hearing stories from women who joined AsPoCa that
Nnamdi was one of a number of men in the group who preyed
upon single or newly widowed women, taking advantage of their
vulnerability to entice them into sexual relationships. Nnamdi’s,
wife, Ogechi, eventually came to CYDI to complain about her
husband’s behavior. She was now worried about protecting
herself and no longer demanded another child. In the words of
one CYDI staff member, “She no longer sees him as a loving
husband for whom she will do anything in his time of need. Now
she sees him as the man she’s living in the same house with
whose actions she cannot predict or control.” In her words, “he is
back to normal,” with all the unhappy connotations it implied.
Nnamdi’s apparent sexual “disinhibition” needs to be understood
in context. Rather than simply a deviation from medical advice
(and from the normative life projects of marriage and reproduction), his behavior is in fact part of common pattern among
married men in Nigeria, who reinforce their social status through
extramarital relationships with younger women (Smith, 2007).
For Nnamdi, his health brought about a return to normal sexual
life, both as a husband and outside his marriage.
Conclusion
For most people who are enrolled in Nigeria’s expanding antiretroviral therapy program, the opportunity to resume a normal life
is cherished and ardently pursued. In our experience, the most
valued part of a resurrected life in Nigeria is the chance to marry (or
remarry) and have children. While the vast majority of people on
ARVs at the FMC-Owerri are mindful of the continued risks, and
committed to keeping themselves and their loved ones safe, the
physical risks to personal and public health are factored into
a larger equation in which the very reasons for being alive are
always paramount.
In southeastern Nigeria, marriage and parenthood, the principal
tasks of biological and social reproduction, reign supreme in the
hierarchy of social expectations and individual aspirations. For
people who are HIV-positive, the importance of these life projects is
felt even more sharply because the stigma of AIDS derives from the
popular perception that infection is indicative of moral failings e
like sexual promiscuity and weakening ties to kin and community
e that are seen as responsible for threatened social reproduction.
By pursuing normative life projects, people on ARVs mark themselves as morally legitimate despite their HIV status e in other
words, they contradict the stereotype surrounding HIV. As the cases
of Nnamdi and Chinyere demonstrated, when individuals pursued
the pro-social life projects of childbearing and faithful marriage,
many spouses dismissed the stigma of their partner’s HIV and were
willing to overlook the risks that their marriage posed to their own

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

health. However, just as Nnamdi’s wife began to fear for her own
status only after she discovered her husband was having extramarital affairs, so the stigma associated with HIV becomes most
salient e perhaps ironically e when HIV-positive people do not
commit themselves wholeheartedly to marriage and childbearing.
Marrying and having children are ways of asserting one’s contribution to family, community, and society, as well as deﬂecting the
moral stigma associated with the disease.
For many people on ARVs the dilemmas of how to make families
while living with HIV are resolved, or at least addressed, by seeking
partners from within support groups like AsPoCa. At FMC-Owerri,
AsPoCa has been a principal meeting ground for people seeking
sexual partners and possible spouses. Several other support groups
have been established in the region and anecdotal reports suggest
that they have also become arenas for sexual networking and
marriage markets (see also Rhine, 2009). Further, as in the larger
society, not all of what goes on in the support group is laudable e
for example, as members of support groups are sometimes subject
to pressure from other members to engage in sexual relationships.
But overall, the emerging communities of people living with HIV
seem to be a positive development, enabling people to forge life
projects, including reproduction, in ways that make it easier to
address both social and medical realities.
The lives of people living with HIV remain intertwined with the
wider population of people who do not know their status. Life
projects, especially reproductive life projects, continue to pose
social predicaments, public health risks, and existential dilemmas.
Whether, when, and how to disclose one’s HIV status; how to marry
and have children in ways that meet social expectations and achieve personal ambitions; and how to stay healthy and on drugs
while doing so e these are all priority issues for people who have
been provided another chance at life by ART.
As the cases described above have illustrated, the availability of
drugs has restored the possibility of normal lives for people with
HIV that were perceived as impossible given the social and biological death sentences associated with AIDS in Nigeria. But stigma
remains powerful. As a result, people on ARVs continue to try to
manage their treatment mostly in secret, while they simultaneously craft public lives that are seen as upholding the values of
creating and perpetuating families, in the process securing the
future of local culture through marriage and childbearing, and in so
doing hopefully mitigating against potential stigma if and when
their status is discovered.
Based on the ﬁndings from this ethnographic examination of
a small population of people on ART in southeastern Nigeria, it is
clear that organizations that provide treatment and counseling
face many challenges in promoting behaviors that are in the
interest of both their individual patients and broader public
health. The experiences at FMC-Owerri and CYDI suggest that it is
crucial to acknowledge, understand, and support the restoration
of reproductive life projects. Given how important sexual relationships, marriage, and reproduction are for people on ART in
southeastern Nigeria e and the likelihood that these priorities
will be similar in many other societies e clinicians, counselors,
and other public health personnel need to be mindful that their
messages and advice will be heeded much more effectively if they
enable these life projects. There is probably no way to avoid the
fact that the fulﬁllment of personal aspirations and social
expectations sometimes directly conﬂicts with public health
interests. But as the stories described here attest, people on ART
are highly attuned to these issues; most of them take all of this
into account to the extent that they can. The life projects of
people on ARVs are complicated, contradictory, and messy.
Perhaps we should not expect much different; ART allows people
infected with HIV to live normal lives.

351

Acknowledgements
This research was supported by National Institutes of Health
grant no. R01 HD041724. We would like to thank colleagues Bianca
Dahl, Constance Nathanson, Jennifer Hirsch, Shanti Parikh, Harriet
Phinney, and Holly Wardlow for their various contributions to
thinking through the ideas developed in this paper, as well Dr.
Eugenia Ofundu at the Federal Medical Centre in Owerri, Nigeria for
her many insights about the lives of people receiving ART.
References
Attia, S., Egger, M., Müller, M., Zwahlen, M., & Low, N. (2009). Sexual transmission of
HIV according to viral load and antiretroviral therapy: systematic review and
meta-analysis. AIDS, 23(11), 1397e1404.
Bateganya, M., Colfax, G., Shafer, L. A., Kityo, C., Mugyenyi, P., Serwadda, D., et al.
(2005). Antiretroviral therapy and sexual behavior: a comparative study between
antiretroviral-naive and -experienced patients at an urban HIV/AIDS care and
research center in Kampala, Uganda. AIDS Patient Care and STDs, 19(11), 760e768.
Castro, A., Khawja, Y., & González-Núñez, I. (2007). Sexuality, reproduction, and HIV
in women: the impact of antiretroviral therapy in elective pregnancies in Cuba.
AIDS, 21(S5), S49eS54.
Cooper, D., Harries, J., Myer, L., Orner, P., & Bracken, H. (2007). “Life is still going on”:
reproductive intentions among HIV-positive women and men in South Africa.
Social Science & Medicine, 65(2), 274e283.
Cusick, L., & Rhodes, T. (2000). Sustaining sexual safety in relationships: HIV
positive people and their sexual partners. Culture, Health & Sexuality, 2(4),
473e487.
Fortes, M. (1978). Parenthood, marriage and fertility in West Africa. Journal of
Development Studies, 14(4), 121e148.
Gruskin, S., Firestone, R., MacCarthy, S., & Ferguson, L. (2008). HIV and pregnancy
intentions: do services adequately respond to women’s needs? American Journal of Public Health, 98(10), 1746e1750.
Hirsch, J. (2007). Gender, sexuality, and antiretroviral therapy: using social science
to enhance outcomes and inform secondary prevention strategies. AIDS, 21
(Suppl. 5), S21eS29.
Hirsch, J., Wardlow, H., Smith, D., Phinney, H., Parikh, S., & Nathanson, C. (2009). The
secret: Love, marriage, and HIV. Nashville: VanderbiltUniversity Press.
Homsy, J., Bunnell, R., Moore, D., King, R., Malamba, S., Nakityo, R., et al. (2009).
Reproductive intentions and outcomes among women on antiretroviral therapy
in rural Uganda: a prospective cohort study. PLoS One, 41, e4149.
Isiugo-Abanihe, U. (1998). Stability of marital unions and fertility in Nigeria. Journal
of Biosocial Science, 30(1), 33e41.
Loubiere, S., Peretti-Watel, P., Boyer, S., Blanche, J., Abega, S.-C., & Spire, B.
(2009). HIV disclosure and unsafe sex among HIV-infected women in
Cameroon: results from the ANSR-EVAL study. Social Science & Medicine, 69
(6), 885e891.
Laher, F., Todd, C. S., Stibich, M. A., Phofa, R., Behane, X., Mohapi, L., et al. (2009). A
qualitative assessment of decisions affecting contraceptive utilization and
fertility intentions among HIV-positive women in Soweto, South Africa. AIDS
and Behavior, 13(Suppl. 1), 47e54.
Lurie, M., Pronyk, P., de Moor, E., Heyer, A., de Bruyn, G., Struthers, H., et al. (2008).
Sexual behavior and reproductive health among HIV-infected patients in urban
and rural South Africa. Journal of Acquired Immune Deﬁciency Syndromes, 47(4),
484e493.
Moatti, J. P., Prudhomme, J., Traore, D. C., Juillet-Amari, A., Akribi, H. A. D., &
Msellati, P. (2003). Access to antiretroviral treatment and sexual behaviours of
HIV-infected patients aware of their serostatus in Cote d’Ivoire. AIDS, 17(Suppl.
3), S69eS77.
Moore, A., & Oppong, J. (2007). Sexual risk behavior among people living with HIV/
AIDS in Togo. Social Science & Medicine, 64(5), 1057e1066.
Myer, L., Morroni, C., & Rebe, K. (2007). Prevalence and determinants of fertility
intentions of HIV-infected women and men receiving antiretroviral therapy in
South Africa. AIDS Patient Care and STDs, 21(4), 278e285.
Persson, A., & Richards, W. (2008). Vulnerability, gender and “proxy negativity”:
women in relationships with HIV-positive men in Australia. Social Science &
Medicine, 67(5), 799e807.
Rhine, K. (2009). Support groups, marriage, and the management of ambiguity
among HIV-positive women in northern Nigeria. Anthropological Quarterly, 82
(2), 369e400.
Rodlach, A. (2007). Witches, westerners, and HIV: AIDS and cultures of blame in Africa.
Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Seeley, J., Russell, S., Khana, K., Ezati, E., King, R., & Bunnell, R. (2009). Sex after ART:
sexual partnerships established by HIV-infected persons taking anti-retroviral
therapy in Eastern Uganda. Culture, Health & Sexuality 1e14.
Setel, P. (1996). AIDS as a paradox of manhood and development in Kilimanjaro,
Tanzania. Social Science & Medicine, 43(8), 1169e1178.
Setel, P. (1999). A plague of paradoxes: AIDS, culture and demography in northern
Tanzania. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Smith, D. J. (2001). Romance, parenthood and gender in a modern African society.
Ethnology, 40(2), 129e151.

352

D.J. Smith, B.C. Mbakwem / Social Science & Medicine 71 (2010) 345e352

Smith, D. J. (2004). Premarital sex, procreation and HIV risk in Nigeria. Studies in
Family Planning, 35(4), 223e235.
Smith, D. J. (2007). Modern marriage, men’s extramarital sex, and HIV risk in
Nigeria. American Journal of Public Health, 97(6), 997e1005.
UNAIDS (2008). Epidemiological fact sheet on HIV and AIDS, Nigeria 2008.
Geneva.

Ware, N., Idoko, J., Kaaya, S., Biraro, I., Wyatt, M., Agbaji, O., et al. (2009). Explaining
adherence success in sub-Saharan Africa: an ethnographic study. PLOS Medicine,
6(1), 39e47.
Watt, M., Maman, S., Earp, J., Eng, E., Setel, P., Golin, C., et al. (2009). “It’s all the time
in my mind”: facilitators of adherence to antiretroviral therapy in a Tanzanian
setting. Social Science & Medicine, 68(10), 1793e1800.

